
Of Truth
what is truth said jesting pilate and would not stay for an answer certainly there be that delight in giddiness and count it a bondage to fix a belief affecting free will in thinking as well as in acting and though the sects of philosophers of that kind be gone  ... 
is found it imposeth upon men s thoughts that doth bring lies in favor but a natural though corrupt love of the lie itself one of the later school of the grecians examineth the matter and is at a stand to think what should be in it that men should  ... 
world half so stately and daintily as candle lights truth may perhaps come to the price of a pearl that showeth best by day but it will not rise to the price of a diamond or carbuncle that showeth best in varied lights a mixture of a lie doth ever  ... 
to themselves one of the fathers in great severity called poesy vinum daemonum because it fireth the imagination and yet it is but with the shadow of a lie but it is not the lie that passeth through the mind but the lie that sinketh in and settleth in it  ... 
is the presence of it and the belief of truth which is the enjoying of it is the sovereign good of human nature the first creature of god in the works of the days was the light of the sense the last was the light of reason and his sabbath  ... 
was otherwise inferior to the rest saith yet excellently well it is a pleasure to stand upon the shore and to see ships tossed upon the sea a pleasure to stand in the window of a castle and to see a battle and the adventures thereof below but no pleasure  ... 
not with swelling or pride certainly it is heaven upon earth to have a man s mind move in charity rest in providence and turn upon the poles of truth to pass from theological and philosophical truth to the truth of civil business it will be acknowledged even by those  ... 
goings of the serpent which goeth basely upon the belly and not upon the feet there is no vice that doth so cover a man with shame as to be found false and perfidious and therefore montaigne saith prettily when he inquired the reason why the word of the lie  ... 
the wickedness of falsehood and breach of faith cannot possibly be so highly expressed as in that it shall be the last peal to call the judgments of god upon the generations of men it being foretold that when christ cometh he shall not find faith upon the earth 
Of Death
men  ... 
a tribute due unto nature is weak yet in religious meditations there is sometimes mixture of vanity and of superstition you shall read in some of the friars books of mortification that a man should think with himself what the pain is if he have but his finger s end  ... 
only as a philosopher and natural man it was well said pompa mortis magis terret quam mors ipsa groans and convulsions and a discolored face and friends weeping and blacks and obsequies and the like show death terrible it is worthy the observing that there is no passion in the  ... 
flieth to it fear preoccupateth it nay we read after otho the emperor had slain himself pity which is the tenderest of affections provoked many to die out of mere compassion to their sovereign and as the truest sort of followers nay seneca adds niceness and satiety cogita quamdiu eadem  ... 
the approaches of death make for they appear to be the same men till the last instant augustus caesar died in a compliment livia conjugii nostri memor vive et vale tiberius in dissimulation as tacitus saith of him jam tiberium vires et corpus non dissimulatio deserebant vespasian in a jest  ... 
made it appear more fearful better saith he qui finem vitae extremum inter munera ponat naturae it is as natural to die as to be born and to a little infant perhaps the one is as painful as the other he that dies in an earnest pursuit is like one  ... 
and expectations death hath this also that it openeth the gate to good fame and extinguisheth envy extinctus amabitur idem 
Of Unity
in religion religion being the chief band of human society it is a happy thing when itself is well contained within the true band of unity the quarrels and divisions  ... 
but the true god hath this attribute that he is a jealous god and therefore his worship and religion will endure no mixture nor partner we shall therefore speak a few words concerning the unity of the church what are the fruits thereof what the bounds and what the means  ... 
scandals yea more than corruption of manners for as in the natural body a wound or solution of continuity is worse than a corrupt humor so in the spiritual so that nothing doth so much keep men out of the church and drive men out of the church as breach  ... 
men s ears nolite exire go not out the doctor of the gentiles the propriety of whose vocation drew him to have a special care of those without saith if an heathen come in and hear you speak with several tongues will he not say that you are mad and  ... 
so serious a matter but yet it expresseth well the deformity there is a master of scoffing that in his catalogue of books of a feigned library sets down this title of a book the morris dance of heretics for indeed every sect of them hath a diverse posture or  ... 
peace of conscience and it turneth the labors of writing and reading of controversies into treaties of mortification and devotion concerning the bounds of unity the true placing of them importeth exceedingly there appear to be two extremes for to certain zealants all speech of pacification is odious is it  ... 
make an arbitrament between god and man both these extremes are to be avoided which will be done if the league of christians penned by our savior himself were in two cross clauses thereof soundly and plainly expounded he that is not with us is against us and again he  ... 
already but if it were done less partially it would be embraced more generally of this i may give only this advice according to my small model men ought to take heed of rending god s church by two kinds of controversies the one is when the matter of the  ... 
varietas sit scissura non sit they be two things unity and uniformity the other is when the matter of the point controverted is great but it is driven to an over great subtilty and obscurity so that it becometh a thing rather ingenious than substantial a man that is of  ... 
think that god above that knows the heart doth not discern that frail men in some of their contradictions intend the same thing and accepteth of both the nature of such controversies is excellently expressed by st paul in the warning and precept that he giveth concerning the same devita  ... 
peace is grounded but upon an implicit ignorance for all colors will agree in the dark the other when it is pieced up upon a direct admission of contraries in fundamental points for truth and falsehood in such things are like the iron and clay in the toes of nebuchadnezzar  ... 
and temporal and both have their due office and place in the maintenance of religion but we may not take up the third sword which is mahomet s sword or like unto it that is to propagate religion by wars or by sanguinary persecutions to force consciences except it be  ... 
is but to dash the first table against the second and so to consider men as christians as we forget that they are men lucretius the poet when he beheld the act of agamemnon that could endure the sacrificing of his own daughter exclaimed tantum religio potuit suadere malorum what  ... 
is a thing monstrous to put it into the hands of the common people let that be left unto the anabaptists and other furies it was great blasphemy when the devil said i will ascend and be like the highest but it is greater blasphemy to personate god and bring  ... 
the holy ghost instead of the likeness of a dove in the shape of a vulture or raven and set out of the bark of a christian church a flag of a bark of pirates and assassins therefore it is most necessary that the church by doctrine and decree princes  ... 
the apostle would be prefixed ira hominis non implet justitiam dei and it was a notable observation of a wise father and no less ingenuously confessed that those which held and persuaded pressure of consciences were commonly interested therein themselves for their own ends 
Of Revenge
revenge is a kind of wild  ... 
with his enemy but in passing it over he is superior for it is a prince s part to pardon and solomon i am sure saith it is the glory of a man to pass by an offence that which is past is gone and irrevocable and wise men have  ... 
be angry with a man for loving himself better than me and if any man should do wrong merely out of ill nature why yet it is but like the thorn or briar which prick and scratch because they can do no other the most tolerable sort of revenge is  ... 
the party should know whence it cometh this is the more generous for the delight seemeth to be not so much in doing the hurt as in making the party repent but base and crafty cowards are like the arrow that flieth in the dark cosmus duke of florence had  ... 
shall we saith he take good at god s hands and not be content to take evil also and so of friends in a proportion this is certain that a man that studieth revenge keeps his own wounds green which otherwise would heal and do well public revenges are for  ... 
so end they infortunate 
Of Adversity
it was an high speech of seneca after the manner of the stoics that the good things which belong to prosperity are to be wished but the good things that belong to adversity are to be admired bona rerum secundarum optabilia adversarum mirabilia certainly if miracles  ... 
hominis securitatem dei this would have done better in poesy where transcendences are more allowed and the poets indeed have been busy with it for it is in effect the thing which figured in that strange fiction of the ancient poets which seemeth not to be without mystery nay and  ... 
through the waves of the world but to speak in a mean the virtue of prosperity is temperance the virtue of adversity is fortitude which in morals is the more heroical virtue prosperity is the blessing of the old testament adversity is the blessing of the new which carrieth the  ... 
the felicities of solomon prosperity is not without many fears and distastes and adversity is not without comforts and hopes we see in needle works and embroideries it is more pleasing to have a lively work upon a sad and solemn ground than to have a dark and melancholy work 
Of Simulation and Dissimulation
 ... 
of policy or wisdom for it asketh a strong wit and a strong heart to know when to tell truth and to do it therefore it is the weaker sort of politics that are the great dissemblers tacitus saith livia sorted well with the arts of her husband and dissimulation  ... 
dissimulation or closeness are indeed habits and faculties several and to be distinguished for if a man have that penetration of judgment as he can discern what things are to be laid open and what to be secreted and what to be showed at half lights and to whom and  ... 
for where a man cannot choose or vary in particulars there it is good to take the safest and wariest way in general like the going softly by one that cannot well see certainly the ablest men that ever were have had all an openness and frankness of dealing and  ... 
spread abroad of their good faith and clearness of dealing made them almost invisible there be three degrees of this hiding and veiling of a man s self the first closeness reservation and secrecy when a man leaveth himself without observation or without hold to be taken what he is  ... 
is indeed the virtue of a confessor and assuredly the secret man heareth many confessions for who will open himself to a blab or a babbler but if a man be thought secret it inviteth discovery as the more close air sucketh in the more open and as in confession  ... 
truth nakedness is uncomely as well in mind as body and it addeth no small reverence to men s manners and actions if they be not altogether open as for talkers and futile persons they are commonly vain and credulous withal for he that talketh what he knoweth will also  ... 
countenance is a great weakness and betraying by how much it is many times more marked and believed than a man s words for the second which is dissimulation it followeth many times upon secrecy by a necessity so that he that will be secret must be a dissembler in  ... 
absurd silence he must show an inclination one way or if he do not they will gather as much by his silence as by his speech as for equivocations or oraculous speeches they cannot hold out long so that no man can be secret except he give himself a little  ... 
is this last degree is a vice using either of a natural falseness or fearfulness or of a mind that hath some main faults which because a man must needs disguise it maketh him practise simulation in other things lest his hand should be out of use the great advantages  ... 
man engage himself by a manifest declaration he must go through or take a fall the third is the better to discover the mind of another for to him that opens himself men will hardly show themselves adverse but will fair let him go on and turn their freedom of  ... 
carry with them a show of fearfulness which in any business doth spoil the feathers of round flying up to the mark the second that it puzzleth and perplexeth the conceits of many that perhaps would otherwise co operate with him and makes a man walk almost alone to his  ... 
feign if there be no remedy 
Of Parents
and children the joys of parents are secret and so are their griefs and fears they cannot utter the one nor they will not utter the other children sweeten labors but they make misfortunes more bitter they increase the cares of life but they  ... 
those of their bodies have failed so the care of posterity is most in them that have no posterity they that are the first raisers of their houses are most indulgent towards their children beholding them as the continuance not only of their kind but of their work and so  ... 
full of children one or two of the eldest respected and the youngest made wantons but in the midst some that are as it were forgotten who many times nevertheless prove the best the illiberality of parents in allowance towards their children is an harmful error makes them base acquaints  ... 
and breeding an emulation between brothers during childhood which many times sorteth to discord when they are men and disturbeth families the italians make little difference between children and nephews or near kinsfolks but so they be of the lump they care not though they pass not through their own  ... 
then they are most flexible and let them not too much apply themselves to the disposition of their children as thinking they will take best to that which they have most mind to it is true that if the affection or aptness of the children be extraordinary then it is 
Of Marriage
 ... 
impediments to great enterprises either of virtue or mischief certainly the best works and of greatest merit for the public have proceeded from the unmarried or childless men which both in affection and means have married and endowed the public yet it were great reason that those that have children  ... 
as bills of charges nay more there are some foolish rich covetous men that take a pride in having no children because they may be thought so much the richer for perhaps they have heard some talk such an one is a great rich man and another except to it  ... 
think their girdles and garters to be bonds and shackles unmarried men are best friends best masters best servants but not always best subjects for they are light to run away and almost all fugitives are of that condition a single life doth well with churchmen for charity will hardly  ... 
their wives and children and i think the despising of marriage amongst the turks maketh the vulgar soldier more base certainly wife and children are a kind of discipline of humanity and single men though they may be many times more charitable because their means are less exhaust yet on  ... 
froward as presuming upon the merit of their chastity it is one of the best bonds both of chastity and obedience in the wife if she think her husband wise which she will never do if she find him jealous wives are young men s mistresses companions for middle age  ... 
it is often seen that bad husbands have very good wives whether it be that it raiseth the price of their husband s kindness when it comes or that the wives take a pride in their patience but this never fails if the bad husbands were of their own choosing 
Of Envy
 ... 
easily into the eye especially upon the present of the objects which are the points that conduce to fascination if any such thing there be we see likewise the scripture calleth envy an evil eye and the astrologers call the evil influences of the stars evil aspects so that still  ... 
or triumph for that sets an edge upon envy and besides at such times the spirits of the person envied do come forth most into the outward parts and so meet the blow but leaving these curiosities though not unworthy to be thought on in fit place we will handle  ... 
or upon others evil and who wanteth the one will prey upon the other and whoso is out of hope to attain to another s virtue will seek to come at even hand by depressing another s fortune a man that is busy and inquisitive is commonly envious for to  ... 
for envy for envy is a gadding passion and walketh the streets and doth not keep home non est curiosus quin idem sit malevolus men of noble birth are noted to be envious towards new men when they rise for the distance is altered and it is like a deceit  ... 
and heroical nature which thinketh to make his natural wants part of his honor in that it should be said that an eunuch or a lame man did such great matters affecting the honor of a miracle as it was in narses the eunuch and agesilaus and tamberlanes that were  ... 
vain glory are ever envious for they cannot want work it being impossible but many in some one of those things should surpass them which was the character of adrian the emperor that mortally envied poets and painters and artificers in works wherein he had a vein to excel lastly  ... 
of others and envy ever redoubleth from speech and fame cain s envy was the more vile and malignant towards his brother abel because when his sacrifice was better accepted there was no body to look on thus much for those that are apt to envy concerning those that are  ... 
man s self and where there is no comparison no envy and therefore kings are not envied but by kings nevertheless it is to be noted that unworthy persons are most envied at their first coming in and afterwards overcome it better whereas contrariwise persons of worth and merit are  ... 
birth besides there seemeth not much added to their fortune and envy is as the sunbeams that beat hotter upon a bank or steep rising ground than upon a flat and for the same reason those that are advanced by degrees are less envied than those that are advanced suddenly  ... 
politic persons in their greataess are ever bemoaning themselves what a life they lead chanting a quanta patimur not that they feel it so but only to abate the edge of envy but this is to be understood of business that is laid upon men and not such as they  ... 
many screens between him and envy above all those are most subject to envy which carry the greatness of their fortunes in an insolent and proud manner being never well but while they are showing how great they are either by outward pomp or by triumphing over all opposition or  ... 
and vain glory doth draw less envy than if it be in a more crafty and cunning fashion for in that course a man doth but disavow fortune and seemeth to be conscious of his own want in worth and doth but teach others to envy him lastly to conclude  ... 
which purpose the wiser sort of great persons bring in ever upon the stage somebody upon whom to derive the envy that would come upon themselves sometimes upon ministers and servants sometimes upon colleagues and associates and the like and for that turn there are never wanting some persons of  ... 
grow too great and therefore it is a bridle also to great ones to keep them within bounds this envy being in the latin word invidia goeth in the modern language by the name of discontentment of which we shall speak in handling sedition it is a disease in a  ... 
for that doth argue but a weakness and fear of envy which hurteth so much the more as it is likewise usual in infections which if you fear them you call them upon you this public envy seemeth to beat chiefly upon principal officers or ministers rather than upon kings  ... 
upon the state itself and so much of public envy or discontentment and the difference thereof from private envy which was handled in the first place we will add this in general touching the affection of envy that of all other affections it is the most importune and continual for  ... 
because they are not so continual it is also the vilest affection and the most depraved for which cause it is the proper attribute of the devil who is called the envious man that soweth tares amongst the wheat by night as it always cometh to pass that envy worketh 
Of Love
 ... 
doth much mischief sometimes like a siren sometimes like a fury you may observe that amongst all the great and worthy persons whereof the memory remaineth either ancient or recent there is not one that hath been transported to the mad degree of love which shows that great spirits and  ... 
it seems though rarely that love can find entrance not only into an open heart but also into a heart well fortified if watch be not well kept it is a poor saying of epicurus satis magnum alter alteri theatrum sumus as if man made for the contemplation of heaven  ... 
how it braves the nature and value of things by this that the speaking in a perpetual hyperbole is comely in nothing but in love neither is it merely in the phrase for whereas it hath been well said that the arch flatterer with whom all the petty flatterers have  ... 
weakness appear to others only and not to the party loved but to the loved most of all except the love be reciproque for it is a true rule that love is ever rewarded either with the reciproque or with an inward and secret contempt by how much the more  ... 
riches and wisdom this passion hath his floods in very times of weakness which are great prosperity and great adversity though this latter hath been less observed both which times kindle love and make it more fervent and therefore show it to be the child of folly they do best  ... 
i know not how but martial men are given to love i think it is but as they are given to wine for perils commonly ask to be paid in pleasures there is in man s nature a secret inclination and motion towards love of others which if it be 
Of Great Place
 ... 
servants of the sovereign or state servants of fame and servants of business so as they have no freedom neither in their persons nor in their actions nor in their times it is a strange desire to seek power and to lose liberty or to seek power over others and  ... 
which is a melancholy thing cum non sis qui fueris non esse cur velis vivere nay retire men cannot when they would neither will they when it were reason but are impatient of privateness even in age and sickness which require the shadow like old townsmen that will be still  ... 
them and that other men would fain be as they are then they are happy as it were by report when perhaps they find the contrary within for they are the first that find their own griefs though they be the last that find their own faults certainly men in  ... 
the latter is a curse for in evil the best condition is not to win the second not to can but power to do good is the true and lawful end of aspiring for good thoughts though god accept them yet towards men are little better than good dreams except  ... 
god s theatre he shall likewise be partaker of god s rest et conversus deus ut aspiceret opera quae fecerunt manus suae vidit quod omnia essent bona nimis and then the sabbath in the discharge of thy place set before thee the best examples for imitation is a globe of  ... 
thyself what to avoid reform therefore without bravery or scandal of former times and persons but yet set it down to thyself as well to create good precedents as to follow them reduce things to the first institution and observe wherein and how they have degenerate but yet ask counsel  ... 
preserve the right of thy place but stir not questions of jurisdiction and rather assume thy right in silence and de facto than voice it with claims and challenges preserve likewise the rights of inferior places and think it more honor to direct in chief than to be busy in  ... 
times appointed go through with that which is in hand and interlace not business but of necessity for corruption do not only bind thine own hands or thy servants hands from taking but bind the hands of suitors also from offering for integrity used doth the one but integrity professed  ... 
the reasons that move thee to change and do not think to steal it a servant or a favorite if he be inward and no other apparent cause of esteem is commonly thought but a by way to close corruption for roughness it is a needless cause of discontent severity  ... 
respect persons is not good for such a man will transgress for a piece of bread it is most true that was anciently spoken a place showeth the man and it showeth some to the better and some to the worse omnium consensu capax imperii nisi imperasset saith tacitus of  ... 
as in nature things move violently to their place and calmly in their place so virtue in ambition is violent in authority settled and calm all rising to great place is by a winding star and if there be factions it is good to side a man s self whilst  ... 
they look not for it than exclude them when they have reason to look to be called be not too sensible or too remembering of thy place in conversation and private answers to suitors but let it rather be said when he sits in place he is another man 
Of Boldness
it  ... 
advantage in that he commended a strange thing that that part of an orator which is but superficial and rather the virtue of a player should be placed so high above those other noble parts of invention elocution and the rest nay almost alone as if it were all in  ... 
boldness what second and third boldness and yet boldness is a child of ignorance and baseness far inferior to other parts but nevertheless it doth fascinate and bind hand and foot those that are either shallow in judgment or weak in courage which are the greatest part yea and prevaileth  ... 
for the natural body so are there mountebanks for the politic body men that undertake great cures and perhaps have been lucky in two or three experiments but want the grounds of science and therefore cannot hold out nay you shall see a bold fellow many times do mahomet s  ... 
he was never a whit abashed but said if the hill will not come to mahomet mahomet will go to the hill so these men when they have promised great matters and failed most shamefully yet if they have the perfection of boldness they will but slight it over and  ... 
absurdity especially it is a sport to see when a bold fellow is out of countenance for that puts his face into a most shrunken and wooden posture as needs it must for in bashfulness the spirits do a little go and come but with bold men upon like occasion  ... 
and inconveniences therefore it is ill in counsel good in execution so that the right use of bold persons is that they never command in chief but be seconds and under the direction of others for in counsel it is good to see dangers and in execution not to see 
Of Goodness & Goodness of Nature
 ... 
nature the inclination this of all virtues and dignities of the mind is the greatest being the character of the deity and without it man is a busy mischievous wretched thing no better than a kind of vermin goodness answers to the theological virtue charity and admits no excess but  ... 
of man insomuch that if it issue not towards men it will take unto other living creatures as it is seen in the turks a cruel people who nevertheless are kind to beasts and give alms to dogs and birds insomuch as busbechius reporteth a christian boy in constantinople had  ... 
of italy nicholas machiavel had the confidence to put in writing almost in plain terms that the christian faith had given up good men in prey to those that are tyrannical and unjust which he spake because indeed there was never law or sect or opinion did so much magnify  ... 
or softness which taketh an honest mind prisoner neither give thou aesop s cock a gem who would be better pleased and happier if he had had a barley corn the example of god teacheth the lesson truly he sendeth his rain and maketh his sun to shine upon the  ... 
the love of our neighbors but the portraiture sell all thou hast and give it to the poor and follow me but sell not all thou hast except thou come and follow me that is except thou have a vocation wherein thou mayest do as much good with little means  ... 
be that in their nature do not affect the good of others the lighter sort of malignity turneth but to a crassness or frowardness or aptness to oppose or difficulties or the like but the deeper sort to envy and mere mischief such men in other men s calamities are  ... 
a tree for the purpose in their gardens as timon had such dispositions are the very errors of human nature and yet they are the fittest timber to make great politics of like to knee timber that is good for ships that are ordained to be tossed but not for  ... 
them if he be compassionate towards the afflictions of others it shows that his heart is like the noble tree that is wounded itself when it gives the balm if he easily pardons and remits offences it shows that his mind is planted above injuries so that he cannot be  ... 
divine nature and a kind of conformity with christ himself 
Of Nobility
we will speak of nobility first as a portion of an estate then as a condition of particular persons a monarchy where there is no nobility at all is ever a pure and absolute tyranny as that of the turks  ... 
and not upon the persons or if upon the persons it is for the business sake as fittest and not for flags and pedigree we see the switzers last well notwithstanding their diversity of religion and of cantons for utility is their bond and not respects the united provinces of  ... 
it is well when nobles are not too great for sovereignty nor for justice and yet maintained in that height as the insolency of inferiors may be broken upon them before it come on too fast upon the majesty of kings a numerous nobility causeth poverty and inconvenience in a  ... 
an ancient castle or building not in decay or to see a fair timber tree sound and perfect how much more to behold an ancient noble family which has stood against the waves and weathers of time for new nobility is but the act of power but ancient nobility is  ... 
their faults die with themselves nobility of birth commonly abateth industry and he that is not industrious envieth him that is besides noble persons cannot go much higher and he that standeth at a stay when others rise can hardly avoid motions of envy on the other side nobility extinguisheth 
Of Seditions
 ... 
troubles shepherds of people had need know the calendars of tempests in state which are commonly greatest when things grow to equality as natural tempests are greatest about the equinoctia and as there are certain hollow blasts of wind and secret swellings of seas before a tempest so are there  ... 
signs of troubles virgil giving the pedigree of fame saith she was sister to the giants illam terra parens irra irritata deorum extremam ut perhibent coeo enceladoque sororem progenuit as if fames were the relics of seditions past but they are no less indeed the preludes of seditions to come  ... 
sense and traduced for that shows the envy great as tacitus saith conflata magna invidia seu bene seu male gesta premunt neither doth it follow that because these fames are a sign of troubles that the suppressing of them with too much severity should be a remedy of troubles for  ... 
excusing cavilling upon mandates and directions is a kind of shaking off the yoke and assay of disobedience especially if in those disputings they which are for the direction speak fearfully and tenderly and those that are against it audaciously also as machiavel noteth well when princes that ought to  ... 
the protestants and presently after the same league was turned upon himself for when the authority of princes is made but an accessory to a cause and that there be other bands that tie faster than the band of sovereignty kings begin to be put almost out of possession also  ... 
that every of them is carried swiftly by the highest motion and softly in their own motion and therefore when great ones in their own particular motion move violently and as tacitus expresseth it well liberius quam ut imperantium meminissent it is a sign the orbs are out of frame  ... 
pass from this part of predictions concerning which nevertheless more light may be taken from that which followeth and let us speak first of the materials of seditions then of the motives of them and thirdly of the remedies concerning the materials of seditions it is a thing well to  ... 
of two kinds much poverty and much discontentment it is certain so many overthrown estates so many votes for troubles lucan noteth well the state of rome before the civil war hinc usura vorax rapidumque in tempore foenus hinc concussa fides et multis utile bellum this same multis utile bellum  ... 
worst as for discontentments they are in the politic body like to humors in the natural which are apt to gather a preternatural heat and to inflame and let no prince measure the danger of them by this whether they be just or unjust for that were to imagine people  ... 
great oppressions the same things that provoke the patience do withal mate the courage but in fears it is not so neither let any prince or state be secure concerning discontentments because they have been often or have been long and yet no peril hath ensued for as it is  ... 
motives of seditions are innovation in religion taxes alteration of laws and customs breaking of privileges general oppression advancement of unworthy persons strangers dearths disbanded soldiers factions grown desperate and what soever in offending people joineth and knitteth them in a common cause for the remedies there may be some  ... 
and poverty in the estate to which purpose serveth the opening and well balancing of trade the cherishing of manufactures the banishing of idleness the repressing of waste and excess by sumptuary laws the improvement and husbanding of the soil the regulating of prices of things vendible the moderating of  ... 
a smaller number that spend more and earn less do wear out an estate sooner than a greater number that live lower and gather more therefore the multiplying of nobility and other degrees of quality in an over proportion to the common people doth speedily bring a state to necessity  ... 
somewhere gotten is somewhere lost there be but three things which one nation selleth unto another the commodity as nature yieldeth it the manufacture and the vecture or carriage so that if these three wheels go wealth will flow as in a spring tide and it cometh many times to  ... 
treasure and moneys in a state be not gathered into few hands for otherwise a state may have a great stock and yet starve and money is like muck not good except it be spread this is done chiefly by suppressing or at least keeping a strait hand upon the  ... 
people are of slow motion if they be not excited by the greater sort and the greater sort are of small strength except the multitude be apt and ready to move of themselves then is the danger when the greater sort do but wait for the troubling of the waters  ... 
how safe it is for monarchs to make sure of the good will of common people to give moderate liberty for griefs and discontentments to evaporate so it be without too great insolency or bravery is a safe way for he that turneth the humors back and maketh the wound  ... 
vessel certainly the politic and artificial nourishing and entertaining of hopes and carrying men from hopes to hopes is one of the best antidotes against the poison of discontentments and it is a certain sign of a wise government and proceeding when it can hold men s hearts by hopes  ... 
least to brave that which they believe not also the foresight and prevention that there be no likely or fit head whereunto discontented persons may resort and under whom they may join is a known but an excellent point of caution i understand a fit head to be one that  ... 
to be fronted with some other of the same party that may oppose them and so divide the reputation generally the dividing and breaking of all factions and combinations that are adverse to the state and setting them at distance or at least distrust amongst themselves is not one of  ... 
given fire to seditions caesar did himself infinite hurt in that speech sylla nescivit literas non potuit dictare for it did utterly cut off that hope which men had entertained that he would at one time or other give over his dictatorship galba undid himself by that speech legi a  ... 
times to beware what they say especially in these short speeches which fly abroad like darts and are thought to be shot out of their secret intentions for as for large discourses they are flat things and not so much noted lastly let princes against all events not be without  ... 
which tacitus saith atque is habitus animorum fuit ut pessimum facinus auderent pauci plures vellent omnes paterentur but let such military persons be assured and well reputed of rather than factious and popular holding also good correspondence with the other great men in the state or else the remedy is 
Of Atheism
 ... 
philosophy inclineth man s mind to atheism but depth in philosophy bringeth men s minds about to religion for while the mind of man looketh upon second causes scattered it may sometimes rest in them and go no further but when it beholdeth the chain of them confederate and linked  ... 
duly and eternally placed need no god than that an army of infinite small portions or seeds unplaced should have produced this order and beauty without a divine marshal the scripture saith the fool hath said in his heart there is no god it is not said the fool hath  ... 
appeareth in nothing more that atheism is rather in the lip than in the heart of man than by this that atheists will ever be talking of that their opinion as if they fainted in it within themselves and would be glad to be strengthened by the consent of others  ... 
should they trouble themselves epicurus is charged that he did but dissemble for his credit s sake when he affirmed there were blessed natures but such as enjoyed themselves without having respect to the government of the world wherein they say he did temporize though in secret he thought there  ... 
nature the indians of the west have names for their particular gods though they have no name for god as if the heathens should have had the names jupiter apollo mars etc but not the word deus which shows that even those barbarous people have the notion though they have  ... 
impugn a received religion or superstition are by the adverse part branded with the name of atheists but the great atheists indeed are hypocrites which are ever handling holy things but without feeling so as they must needs be cauterized in the end the causes of atheism are divisions in  ... 
third is custom of profane scoffing in holy matters which doth by little and little deface the reverence of religion and lastly learned times specially with peace and prosperity for troubles and adversities do more bow men s minds to religion they that deny a god destroy man s nobility  ... 
what a generosity and courage he will put on when he finds himself maintained by a man who to him is instead of a god or melior natura which courage is manifestly such as that creature without that confidence of a better nature than his own could never attain so  ... 
as it is in particular persons so it is in nations never was there such a state for magnanimity as rome of this state hear what cicero saith quam volumus licet patres conscripti nos amemus tamen nec numero hispanos nec robore gallos nec calliditate poenos nec artibus graecos nec denique 
Of Superstition
 ... 
unworthy of him for the one is unbelief the other is contumely and certainly superstition is the reproach of the deity plutarch saith well to that purpose surely saith he i had rather a great deal men should say there was no such man at all as plutarch than that  ... 
piety to laws to reputation all which may be guides to an outward moral virtue though religion were not but superstition dismounts all these and erecteth an absolute monarchy in the minds of men therefore theism did never perturb states for it makes men wary of themselves as looking no  ... 
all superstition wise men follow fools and arguments are fitted to practice in a reversed order it was gravely said by some of the prelates in the council of trent where the doctrine of the schoolmen bare great sway that the schoolmen were like astronomers which did feign eccentrics and  ... 
sensual rites and ceremonies excess of outward and pharisaical holiness overgreat reverence of traditions which cannot but load the church the stratagems of prelates for their own ambition and lucre the favoring too much of good intentions which openeth the gate to conceits and novelties the taking an aim at  ... 
makes it the more deformed and as wholesome meat corrupteth to little worms so good forms and orders corrupt into a number of petty observances there is a superstition in avoiding superstition when men think to do best if they go furthest from the superstition formerly received therefore care would 
Of Travel
 ... 
country before he hath some entrance into the language goeth to school and not to travel that young men travel under some tutor or grave servant i allow well so that he be such a one that hath the language and hath been in the country before whereby he may  ... 
voyages where there is nothing to be seen but sky and sea men should make diaries but in land travel wherein so much is to be observed for the most part they omit it as if chance were fitter to be registered than observation let diaries therefore be brought in  ... 
of cities and towns and so the heavens and harbors antiquities and ruins libraries colleges disputations and lectures where any are shipping and navies houses and gardens of state and pleasure near great cities armories arsenals magazines exchanges burses warehouses exercises of horsemanship fencing training of soldiers and the like  ... 
executions and such shows men need not to be put in mind of them yet are they not to be neglected if you will have a young man to put his travel into a little room and in short time to gather much this you must do first as was  ... 
key to his inquiry let him keep also a diary let him not stay long in one city or town more or less as the place deserveth but not long nay when he stayeth in one city or town let him change his lodging from one end and part of  ... 
some person of quality residing in the place whither he removeth that he may use his favor in those things he desireth to see or know thus he may abridge his travel with much profit as for the acquaintance which is to be sought in travel that which is most  ... 
tell how the life agreeth with the fame for quarrels they are with care and discretion to be avoided they are commonly for mistresses healths place and words and let a man beware how he keepeth company with choleric and quarrelsome persons for they will engage him into their own  ... 
in his discourse let him be rather advised in his answers than forward to tell stories and let it appear that he doth not change his country manners for those of foreign parts but only prick in some flowers of that he hath learned abroad into the customs of his 
Of Empire
 ... 
and shadows which makes their minds the less clear and this is one reason also of that effect which the scripture speaketh of that the king s heart is inscrutable for multitude of jealousies and lack of some predominant desire that should marshal and put in order all the rest  ... 
art or feat of the hand as nero for playing on the harp domitian for certainty of the hand with the arrow commodus for playing at fence caracalla for driving chariots and the like this seemeth incredible unto those that know not the principle that the mind of man is  ... 
in their fortunes turn in their latter years to be superstitious and melancholy as did alexander the great diocletian and in our memory charles the fifth and others for he that is used to go forward and findeth a stop falleth out of his own favor and is not the  ... 
excellent instruction vespasian asked him what was nero s overthrow he answered nero could touch and tune the harp well but in government sometimes he used to wind the pins too high sometimes to let them down too low and certain it is that nothing destroyeth authority so much as  ... 
aloof but this is but to try masteries with fortune and let men beware how they neglect and suffer matter of trouble to be prepared for no man can forbid the spark nor tell whence it may come the difficulties in princes business are many and great but the greatest  ... 
deal with their neighbors their wives their children their prelates or clergy their nobles their second nobles or gentlemen their merchants their commons and their men of war and from all these arise dangers if care and circumspection be not used first for their neighbors there can no general rule  ... 
than they were and this is generally the work of standing counsels to foresee and to hinder it during that triumvirate of kings king henry the eighth of england francis the first king of france and charles the fifth emperor there was such a watch kept that none of the  ... 
of italy made between ferdinando king of naples lorenzius medici and ludovicus sforza potentates the one of florence the other of milan neither is the opinion of some of the schoolmen to be received that a war cannot justly be made but upon a precedent injury or provocation for there  ... 
that renowned prince sultan mustapha and otherwise troubled his house and succession edward the second of england his queen had the principal hand in the deposing and murder of her husband this kind of danger is then to be feared chiefly when the wives have plots for the raising of  ... 
s line as the succession of the turks from solyman until this day is suspected to be untrue and of strange blood for that selymus the second was thought to be suppositious the destruction of crispus a young prince of rare towardness by constantinus the great his father was in  ... 
upon the father who died of repentance and many like examples there are but few or none where the fathers had good by such distrust except it were where the sons were up in open arms against them as was selymus the first against bajazet and the three sons of  ... 
they had to deal with stout and haughty kings william rufus henry the first and henry the second the danger is not from that state but where it hath a dependence of foreign authority or where the churchmen come in and are elected not by the collation of the king  ... 
of king henry the seventh of england who depressed bis nobility whereupon it came to pass that his times were full of difficulties and troubles for the nobility though they continued loyal unto him yet did they not co operate with him in his business so that in effect he  ... 
the most immediate in authority with the common people they do best temper popular commotions for their merchants they are vena porta and if they flourish not a kingdom may have good limbs but will have empty veins and nourish little taxes and imposts upon them do seldom good to  ... 
where you meddle with the point of religion or their customs or means of life for their men of war it is a dangerous state where they live and remain in a body and are used to donatives whereof we see examples in the janizaries and pretorian bands of rome  ... 
effect comprehended in those two remembrances memento quod es homo and memento quod es deus or vice dei the one bridleth their power and the other their will 
Of Counsel
the greatest trust between man and man is the trust of giving counsel for in other confidences men commit the parts of  ... 
derogation to their sufficiency to rely upon counsel god himself is not without but hath made it one of the great names of his blessed son the counsellor solomon hath pronounced that in counsel is stability things will have their first or second agitation if they be not tossed upon  ... 
was first rent and broken by ill counsel upon which counsel there are set for our instruction the two marks whereby bad counsel is for ever best discerned that it was young counsel for the person and violent counsel for the matter the ancient times do set forth in figure  ... 
thus they say after jupiter was married to metis she conceived by him and was with child but jupiter suffered her not to stay till she brought forth but eat her up whereby he became himself with child and was delivered of pallas armed out of his head which monstrous  ... 
and ready to be brought forth that then they suffer not their counsel to go through with the resolution and direction as if it depended on them but take the matter back into their own hands and make it appear to the world that the decrees and final directions which  ... 
that have been noted in calling and using counsel are three first the revealing of affairs whereby they become less secret secondly the weakening of the authority of princes as if they were less of themselves thirdly the danger of being unfaithfully counselled and more for the good of them  ... 
and select neither is it necessary that he that consulteth what he should do should declare what he will do but let princes beware that the unsecreting of their affairs comes not from themselves and as for cabinet counsels it may be their motto plenus rimarum sum one futile person  ... 
the secrecy they conunonly go on constantly in one spirit of direction without distraction but then it must be a prudent king such as is able to grind with a handmill and those inward counsellors had need also be wise men and especially true and trusty to the king s  ... 
the chair of counsel neither was there ever prince bereaved of his dependences by his counsel except where there hath been either an over greatness in one counsellor or an over strict combination in divers which are things soon found and holpen for the last inconvenience that men will counsel  ... 
besides counsellors are not commonly so united but that one counsellor keepeth sentinel over another so that if any do counsel out of faction or private ends it commonly comes to the king s ear but the best remedy is if princes know their counsellors as well as their counsellors  ... 
advise him and not feed his humor it is of singular use to princes if they take the opinions of their counsel both separately and together for private opinion is more free but opinion before others is more reverent in private men are more bold in their own humors and  ... 
no counsel likewise concerning persons for all matters are as dead images and the life of the execution of affairs resteth in the good choice of persons neither is it enough to consult concerning persons secundum genera as in an idea or mathematical description what the kind and character of  ... 
themselves have been actors upon the stage the counsels at this day in most places are but familiar meetings where matters are rather talked on than debated and they run too swift to the order or act of counsel it were better that in causes of weight the matter were  ... 
attendance and it frees the meetings for matters of estate that they may hoc agere in choice of committees for ripening business for the counsel it is better to choose indifferent persons than to make an indifferency by putting in those that are strong on both sides i commend also  ... 
are to inform counsels out of their particular professions as lawyers seamen mintmen and the like be first heard before committees and then as occasion serves before the counsel and let them not come in multitudes or in a tribunitious manner for that is to clamor counsels not to inform  ... 
counsellors opinions that sit lower a king when he presides in counsel let him beware how he opens his own inclination too much in that which he propoundeth for else counsellors will but take the wind of him and instead of giving free counsel sing him a song of placebo 
Of Delays
 ... 
in the common verse turneth a bald noddle after she hath presented her locks in front and no hold taken or at least turneth the handle of the bottle first to be received and after the belly which is hard to clasp there is surely no greater wisdom than well  ... 
their approaches for if a man watch too long it is odds he will fall asleep on the other side to be deceived with too long shadows as some have been when the moon was low and shone on their enemies back and so to shoot off before the time  ... 
and the ends to briareus with his hundred hands first to watch and then to speed for the helmet of pluto which maketh the politic man go invisible is secrecy in the counsel and celerity in the execution for when things are once come to the execution there is no 
Of Cunning
 ... 
of honesty but in point of ability there be that can pack the cards and yet cannot play well so there are some that are good in canvasses and factions that are otherwise weak men again it is one thing to understand persons and another thing to understand matters for  ... 
them to new men and they have lost their aim so as the old rule to know a fool from a wise man mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos et videbis doth scarce hold for them and because these cunning men are like haberdashers of small wares it is not amiss  ... 
abasing of your eye sometimes as the jesuits also do use another is that when you have anything to obtain of present despatch you entertain and amuse the party with whom you deal with some other discourse that he be not too much awake to make objections i knew a  ... 
and cannot stay to consider advisedly of that is moved if a man would cross a business that he doubts some other would handsomely and effectually move let him pretend to wish it well and move it himself in such sort as may foil it the breaking off in the  ... 
may lay a bait for a question by showing another visage and countenance than you are wont to the end to give occasion for the party to ask what the matter is of the change as nehemias did and i had not before that time been sad before the king  ... 
did relating to claudius the marriage of messalina and silius in things that a man would not be seen in himself it is a point of cunning to borrow the name of the world as to say the world says or there is a speech abroad i knew one that  ... 
and speak of it as of a thing that he had almost forgot some procure themselves to be surprised at such times as it is like the party that they work upon will suddenly come upon them and to be found with a letter in their hand or doing somewhat  ... 
thereupon take advantage i knew two that were competitors for the secretary s place in queen elizabeth s time and yet kept good quarter between themselves and would confer one with another upon the business and the one of them said that to be a secretary in the declination of  ... 
and found means it was told the queen who hearing of a declination of a monarchy took it so ill as she would never after hear of the other s suit there is a cunning which we in england call the turning of the cat in the pan which is  ... 
way that some men have to glance and dart at others by justifying themselves by negatives as to say this i do not as tigellinus did towards burrhus se non diversas spes sed incolumitatem imperatoris simpliciter spectare some have in readiness so many tales and stories as there is nothing  ... 
and propositions for it makes the other party stick the less it is strange how long some men will lie in wait to speak somewhat they desire to say and how far about they will fetch and how many other matters they will beat over to come near it it  ... 
true name whereat straightways he looked back but these small wares and petty points of cunning are infinite and it were a good deed to make a list of them for that nothing doth more hurt in a state than that cunning men pass for wise but certainly some there  ... 
or debate matters and yet commonly they take advantage of their inability and would be thought wits of direction some build rather upon the abusing of others and as we now say putting tricks upon them than upon soundness of their own proceedings but solomon saith prudens advertit ad gressus 
Of Wisdom Fo a Mans Self
 ... 
thou be not false to others specially to thy king and country it is a poor centre of a man s actions himself it is right earth for that only stands fast upon his own centre whereas all things that have affinity with the heavens move upon the centre of  ... 
prince or a citizen in a republic for whatsoever affairs pass such a man s hands he crooketh them to his own ends which must needs be often eccentric to the ends of his master or state therefore let princes or states choose such servants as have not this mark  ... 
good of the servant shall carry things against a great good of the master s and yet that is the case of bad officers treasurers ambassadors generals and other false and corrupt servants which set a bias upon their bowl of their own petty ends and envies to the overthrow  ... 
extreme self lovers as they will set an house on fire and it were but to roast their eggs and yet these men many times hold credit with their masters because their study is but to please them and profit themselves and for either respect they will abandon the good  ... 
made room for him it is the wisdom of crocodiles that shed tears when they would devour but that which is specially to be noted is that those which as cicero says of pompey are sui amantes sine rivali are many times unfortunate and whereas they have all their times 
Of Innovations
 ... 
that first bring honor into their family are commonly more worthy than most that succeed so the first precedent if it be good is seldom attained by imitation for ill to man s nature as it stands perverted hath a natural motion strongest in continuance but good as a forced  ... 
shall be the end it is true that what is settled by custom though it be not good yet at least it is fit and those things which have long gone together are as it were confederate within themselves whereas new things piece not so well but though they help  ... 
too much old times are but a scorn to the new it were good therefore that men in their innovations would follow the example of time itself which indeed innovateth greatly but quietly by degrees scarce to be perceived for otherwise whatsoever is new is unlooked for and ever it  ... 
utility evident and well to beware that it be the reformation that draweth on the change and not the desire of change that pretendeth the reformation and lastly that the novelty though it be not rejected yet be held for a suspect and as the scripture saith that we make 
Of Dispatch
 ... 
hasty digestion which is sure to fill the body full of crudities and secret seeds of diseases therefore measure not dispatch by the times of sitting but by the advancement of the business and as in races it is not the large stride or high lift that makes the speed  ... 
it is one thing to abbreviate by contracting another by cutting off and business so handled at several sittings or meetings goeth commonly backward and forward in an unsteady manner i knew a wise man that had it for a byword when he saw men hasten to a conclusion stay  ... 
been noted to be of small dispatch mi venga la muerte de spagna let my death come from spain for then it will be sure to be long in coming give good hearing to those that give the first information in business and rather direct them in the beginning than  ... 
is seen that the moderator is more troublesome than the actor iterations are commonly loss of time but there is no such gain of time as to iterate often the state of the question for it chaseth away many a frivolous speech as it is coming forth long and curious  ... 
being too material when there is any impediment or obstruction in men s wills for pre occupation of mind ever requireth preface of speech like a fomentation to make the unguent enter above all things order and distribution and singling out of parts is the life of dispatch so as  ... 
parts of business the preparation the debate or examination and the perfection whereof if you look for dispatch let the middle only be the work of many and the first and last the work of few the proceeding upon somewhat conceived in writing doth for the most part facilitate dispatch 
Of Seeming Wise
 ... 
between nations certainly it is so between man and man for as the apostle saith of godliness having a show of godliness but denying the power thereof so certainly there are in point of wisdom and sufficiently that do nothing or little very solemnly magno conatu nugas it is a  ... 
and seem always to keep back somewhat and when they know within themselves they speak of that they do not well know would nevertheless seem to others to know of that which they may not well speak some help themselves with countenance and gesture and are wise by signs as  ... 
word and being peremptory and go on and take by admittance that which they cannot make good some whatsoever is beyond their reach will seem to despise or make light of it as impertinent or curious and so would have their ignorance seem judgment some are never without a difference  ... 
to the end generally such men in all deliberations find ease to be of the negative side and affect a credit to object and foretell difficulties for when propositions are denied there is an end of them but if they be allowed it requireth a new work which false point  ... 
let no man choose them for employment for certainly you were better take for business a man somewhat absurd than over formal 
Of Friendship
it had been hard for him that spake it to have put more truth and untruth together in few words than in that speech whatsoever is delighted in  ... 
except it proceed not out of a pleasure in solitude but out of a love and desire to sequester a man s self for a higher conversation such as is found to have been falsely and feignedly in some of the heathen as epimenides the candian numa the roman empedocles  ... 
talk but a tinkling cymbal where there is no love the latin adage meeteth with it a little magna civitas magna solitudo because in a great town friends are scattered so that there is not that fellowship for the most part which is in less neighborhoods but we may go  ... 
the beast and not from humanity a principal fruit of friendship is the ease and discharge of the fulness and swellings of the heart which passions of all kinds do cause and induce we know diseases of stoppings and suffocations are the most dangerous in the body and it is  ... 
and whatsoever lieth upon the heart to oppress it in a kind of civil shrift or confession it is a strange thing to observe how high a rate great kings and monarchs do set upon this fruit of friendship whereof we speak so great as they purchase it many times  ... 
themselves which many times sorteth to inconvenience the modern languages give unto such persons the name of favorites or privadoes as if it were matter of grace or conversation but the roman name attaineth the true use and cause thereof naming them participes curarum for it is that which tieth  ... 
them in the same manner using the word which is received between private men l sylla when he commanded rome raised pompey after surnamed the great to that height that pompey vaunted himself for sylla s overmatch for when he had carried the consulship for a friend of his against  ... 
as he set him down in his testament for heir in remainder after his nephew and this was the man that had power with him to draw him forth to his death for when caesar would have discharged the senate in regard of some ill presages and specially a dream  ... 
one of cicero s philippics calleth him venefica witch as if he had enchanted caesar augustus raised agrippa though of mean birth to that height as when he consulted with maecenas about the marriage of his daughter julia maecenas took the liberty to tell him that he must either marry  ... 
amicitia nostra non occultavi and the whole senate dedicated an altar to friendship as to a goddess in respect of the great dearness of friendship between them two the like or more was between septimius severus and plautianus for he forced his eldest son to marry the daughter of plautianus  ... 
aurelius a man might have thought that this had proceeded of an abundant goodness of nature but being men so wise of such strength and severity of mind and so extreme lovers of themselves as all these were it proveth most plainly that they found their own felicity though as  ... 
be forgotten what comineus observeth of his first master duke charles the hardy namely that he would communicate his secrets with none and least of all those secrets which troubled him most whereupon he goeth on and saith that towards his latter time that closeness did impair and a little  ... 
give it a hard phrase those that want friends to open themselves unto are carnnibals of their own hearts but one thing is most admirable wherewith i will conclude this first fruit of friendship which is that this communicating of a man s self to his friend works two contrary  ... 
upon a man s mind of like virtue as the alchemists use to attribute to their stone for man s body that it worketh all contrary effects but still to the good and benefit of nature but yet without praying in aid of alchemists there is a manifest image of  ... 
is for the affections for friendship maketh indeed a fair day in the affections from storm and tempests but it maketh daylight in the understanding out of darkness and confusion of thoughts neither is this to be understood only of faithful counsel which a man receiveth from his friend but  ... 
they are turned into words finally he waxeth wiser than himself and that more by an hour s discourse than by a day s meditation it was well said by themistocles to the king of persia that speech was like cloth of arras opened and put abroad whereby the imagery  ... 
and bringeth his own thoughts to light and whetteth his wits as against a stone which itself cuts not in a word a man were better relate himself to a statua or picture than to suffer his thoughts to pass in smother add now to make this second fruit of  ... 
is drier and purer than that which cometh from his own understanding and judgment which is ever infused and drenched in his affections and customs so as there is as much difference between the counsel that a friend giveth and that a man giveth himself as there is between the  ... 
concerning business for the first the best preservative to keep the mind in health is the faithful admonition of a friend the calling of a man s self to a strict account is a medicine sometime too piercing and corrosive reading good books of morality is a little flat and  ... 
do commit for want of a friend to tell them of them to the great damage both of their fame and fortune for as st james saith they are as men that look sometimes into a glass and presently forget their own shape and favor as for business a man  ... 
shot off as well upon the arm as upon a rest and such other fond and high imaginations to think himself all in all but when all is done the help of good counsel is that which setteth business straight and if any man think that he will take counsel  ... 
for it is a rare thing except it be from a perfect and entire friend to have counsel given but such as shall be bowed and crooked to some ends which he hath that giveth it the other that he shall have counsel given hurtful and unsafe though with good  ... 
your health in some other kind and so cure the disease and kill the patient but a friend that is wholly acquainted with a man s estate will beware by furthering any present business how he dasheth upon other inconvenience and therefore rest not upon scattered counsels they will rather  ... 
best way to represent to life the manifold use of friendship is to cast and see how many things there are which a man cannot do himself and then it will appear that it was a sparing speech of the ancients to say that a friend is another himself for  ... 
almost secure that the care of those things will continue after him so that a man hath as it were two lives in his desires a man hath a body and that body is confined to a place but where friendship is all offices of life are as it were  ... 
brook to supplicate or beg and a number of the like but all these things are graceful in a friend s mouth which are blushing in a man s own so again a man s person hath many proper relations which he cannot put off a man cannot speak to  ... 
man cannot fitly play his own part if he have not a friend he may quit the stage 
Of Expense
riches are for spending and spending for honor and good actions therefore extraordinary expense must be limited by the worth of the occasion for voluntary undoing may be as well for a  ... 
may be less than the estimation abroad certainly if a man will keep but of even hand his ordinary expenses ought to be but to the half of his receipts and if he think to wax rich but to the third part it is no baseness for the greatest to  ... 
those whom he employeth and change them often for new are more timorous and less subtle he that can look into his estate but seldom it behooveth him to turn all to certainties a man had need if he be plentiful in some kind of expense to be as saving  ... 
of a man s estate he may as well hurt himself in being too sudden as in letting it run on too long for hasty selling is commonly as disadvantageable as interest besides he that clears at once will relapse for finding himself out of straits he will revert to  ... 
petty gettings a man ought warily to begin charges which once begun will continue but in matters that return not he may be more magnificent 
Of the True Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates
the speech of themistocles the athenian which was haughty and arrogant in taking so much to himself had been a grave and wise observation and  ... 
of estate for if a true survey be taken of counsellors and statesmen there may be found though rarely those which can make a small state great and yet cannot fiddle as on the other side there will be found a great many that can fiddle very cunningly but yet  ... 
with the vulgar deserve no better name than fiddling being things rather pleasing for the time and graceful to themselves only than tending to the weal and advancement of the state which they serve there are also no doubt counsellors and governors which may be held sufficient negotiis pares able  ... 
kingdoms and estates and the means thereof an argument fit for great and mighty princes to have in their hand to the end that neither by over measuring their forces they leese themselves in vain enterprises nor on the other side by undervaluing them they descend to fearful and pusillanimous  ... 
thing amongst civil affairs more subject to error than the right valuation and true judgment concerning the power and forces of an estate the kingdom of heaven is compared not to any great kernel or nut but to a grain of mustard seed which is one of the least grains  ... 
towns stored arsenals and armories goodly races of horse chariots of war elephants ordnance artillery and the like all this is but a sheep in a lion s skin except the breed and disposition of the people be stout and warlike nay number itself in armies importeth not much where  ... 
to him therefore and wished him to set upon them by night and he answered he would not pilfer the victory and the defeat was easy when tigranes the armenian being encamped upon a hill with four hundred thousand men discovered the army of the romans being not above fourteen  ... 
odds between number and courage so that a man may truly make a judgment that the principal point of greatness in any state is to have a race of military men neither is money the sinews of war as it is trivially said where the sinews of men s arms  ... 
forces except his militia of natives be of good and valiant soldiers and let princes on the other side that have subjects of martial disposition know their own strength unless they be otherwise wanting unto themselves as for mercenary forces which is the help in this case all examples show  ... 
burthens neither will it be that a people overlaid with taxes should ever become valiant and martial it is true that taxes levied by consent of the estate do abate men s courage less as it hath been seen notably in the excises of the low countries and in some  ... 
that you may conclude that no people overcharged with tribute is fit for empire let states that aim at greatness take heed how their nobility and gentlemen do multiply too fast for that maketh the common subject grow to be a peasant and base swain driven out of heart and  ... 
it to that that not the hundred poll will be fit for an helmet especially as to the infantry which is the nerve of an army and so there will be great population and little strength this which i speak of hath been nowhere better seen than by comparing of  ... 
history of his life was profound and admirable in making farms and houses of husbandry of a standard that is maintained with such a proportion of land unto them as may breed a subject to live in convenient plenty and no servile condition and to keep the plough in the  ... 
anywhere else except it be perhaps in poland to be passed over i mean the state of free servants and attendants upon noblemen and gentlemen which are no ways inferior unto the yeomanry for arms and therefore out of all questions the splendor and magnificence and great retinues and hospitality  ... 
to bear the branches and the boughs that is that the natural subjects of the crown or state bear a sufficient proportion to the stranger subjects that they govern therefore all states that are liberal of naturalization towards strangers are fit for empire for to think that an handful of  ... 
did spread and their boughs were becomen too great for their stem they became a windfall upon the sudden never any state was in this point so open to receive strangers into their body as were the romans therefore it sorted with them accordingly for they grew to the greatest  ... 
to cities and sometimes to nations add to this their custom of plantation of colonies whereby the roman plant was removed into the soil of other nations and putting both constitutions together you will say that it was not the romans that spread upon the world but it was the  ... 
rome and sparta at the first and besides though they have not had that usage to naturalize liberally yet they have that which is next to it that is to employ almost indifferently all nations in their militia of ordinary soldiers yea and sometimes in their highest commands nay it  ... 
and generally all warlike people are a little idle and love danger better than travail neither must they be too much broken of it if they shall be preserved in vigor therefore it was great advantage in the ancient states of sparta athens rome and others that they had the  ... 
bulk of the vulgar natives within those three kinds tillers of the ground free servants and handicraftsmen of strong and manly arts as smiths masons carpenters etc not reckoning professed soldiers but above all for empire and greatness it importeth most that a nation do profess arms as their principal  ... 
they should prove the greatest empire of the world the fabric of the state of sparta was wholly though not wisely framed and composed to that scope and end the persians and macedonians had it for a flash the gauls germans goths saxons normans and others had it for a  ... 
to point at it that no nation which doth not directly profess arms may look to have greatness fall into their mouths and on the other side it is a most certain oracle of time that those states that continue long in that profession as the romans and turks principally  ... 
laws or customs which may reach forth unto them just occasions as may be pretended of war for there is that justice imprinted in the nature of men that they enter not upon wars whereof so many calamities do ensue but upon some at the least specious grounds and quarrels  ... 
upon that alone to begin a war first therefore let nations that pretend to greatness have this that they be sensible of wrongs either upon borderers merchants or politic ministers and that they sit not too long upon a provocation secondly let them be prest and ready to give aids  ... 
honor as for the wars which were anciently made on the behalf of a kind of party or tacit conformity of estate i do not see how they may be well justified as when the romans made a war for the liberty of grecia or when the lacedaemonians and athenians  ... 
not awake upon any just occasion of arming no body can be healthful without exercise neither natural body nor politic and certainly to a kingdom or estate a just and honorable war is the true exercise a civil war indeed is like the heat of a fever but a foreign  ... 
the strength of a veteran army though it be a chargeable business always on foot is that which commonly giveth the law or at least the reputation amongst all neighbor states as may well be seen in spain which hath had in one part or other a veteran army almost  ... 
tired out caesar if upon vain confidence he had not left that way we see the great effects of battles bv sea the battle of actium decided the empire of the world the battle of lepanto arrested the greatness of the turk there be many examples where sea fights have  ... 
those that be strongest by land are many times nevertheless in great straits surely at this day with us of europe the vantage of strength at sea which is one of the principal dowries of this kingdom of great britain is great both because most of the kingdoms of europe  ... 
glory and honor which reflected upon men from the wars in ancient time there be now for martial encouragement some degrees and orders of chivalry which nevertheless are conferred promiscuously upon soldiers and no soldiers and some remembrance perhaps upon the scutcheon and some hospitals for maimed soldiers and such  ... 
upon their return the great donatives and largesses upon the disbanding of the armies were things able to inflame all men s courages but above all that of the triumph amongst the romans was not pageants or gaudery but one of the wisest and noblest institutions that ever was for  ... 
times of the roman emperors who did impropriate the actual triumphs to themselves and their sons for such wars as they did achieve in person and left only for wars achieved by subjects some triumphal garments and ensigns to the general to conclude no man can by care taking as  ... 
and customs as we have now touched they may sow greatness to their posterity and succession but these things are commonly not observed but left to take their chance 
Of Regiment

Of Health
there is a wisdom in this beyond the rules of physic a man s own observation what he finds good of  ... 
in youth passeth over many excesses which are owing a man till his age discern of the coming on of years and think not to do the same things still for age will not be defied beware of sudden change in any great point of diet and if necessity enforce  ... 
little and little but so as if thou dost find any inconvenience by the change thou come back to it again for it is hard to distinguish that which is generally held good and wholesome from that which is good particularly and fit for thine own body to be free  ... 
communicated entertain hopes mirth rather than joy variety of delights rather than surfeit of them wonder and admiration and therefore novelties studies that fill the mind with splendid and illustrious objects as histories fables and contemplations of nature if you fly physic in health altogether it will be too strange  ... 
and trouble it less despise no new accident in your body but ask opinion of it in sickness respect health principally and in health action for those that put their bodies to endure in health may in most sicknesses which are not very sharp be cured only with diet and  ... 
fasting and full eating but rather full eating watching and sleep but rather sleep sitting and exercise but rather exercise and the like so shall nature be cherished and yet taught masteries physicians are some of them so pleasing and conformable to the humor of the patient as they press  ... 
either sort and forget not to call as well the best acquainted with your body as the best reputed of for his faculty 
Of Suspicion
suspicions amongst thoughts are like bats amongst birds they ever fly by twilight certainly they are to be repressed or at least well guarded for they cloud  ... 
natures as in the example of henry the seventh of england there was not a more suspicious man nor a more stout and in such a composition they do small hurt for commonly they are not admitted but with examination whether they be likely or no but in fearful natures  ... 
are saints do they not think they will have their own ends and be truer to themselves than to them therefore there is no better way to moderate suspicions than to account upon such suspicions as true and yet to bridle them as false for so far a man ought  ... 
whisperings of others have stings certainly the best mean to clear the way in this same wood of suspicions is frankly to communicate them with the party that he suspects for thereby he shall be sure to know more of the truth of them than he did before and withal  ... 
faith but it ought rather to kindle it to discharge itself 
Of Discourse
some in their discourse desire rather commendation of wit in being able to hold all arguments than of judgment in discerning what is true as if it were a praise to know what might be said and not what  ... 
to somewhat else for then a man leads the dance it is good in discourse and speech of conversation to vary and intermingle speech of the present occasion with arguments tales with reasons asking of questions with telling of opinions and jest with earnest for it is a dull thing  ... 
some that think their wits have been asleep except they dart out somewhat that is piquant and to the quick that is a vein which would be bridled parce puer stimulis et fortius utere loris and generally men ought to find the difference between saltness and bitterness certainly he that  ... 
give them occasion to please themselves in speaking and himself shall continually gather knowledge but let his questions not be troublesome for that is fit for a poser and let him be sure to leave other men their turns to speak nay if there be any that would reign and  ... 
know that you know not speech of a man s self ought to be seldom and well chosen i knew one was wont to say in scorn he must needs be a wise man he speaks so much of himself and there is but one case wherein a man may  ... 
of the west part of england whereof the one was given to scoff but kept ever royal cheer in his house the other would ask of those that had been at the other s table tell truly was there never a flout or dry blow given to which the guest  ... 
good continued speech without a good speech of interlocution shows slowness and a good reply or second speech without a good settled speech showeth shallowness and weakness as we see in beasts that those that are weakest in the course are yet nimblest in the turn as it is betwixt 
Of Plantations
 ... 
for i may justly account new plantations to be the children of former kingdoms i like a plantation in a pure soil that is where people are not displanted to the end to plant in others for else it is rather an extirpation than a plantation planting of countries is  ... 
speedy profit is not to be neglected as far as may stand with the good of the plantation but no further it is a shameful and unblessed thing to take the scum of people and wicked condemned men to be the people with whom you plant and not only so  ... 
be gardeners ploughmen laborers smiths carpenters joiners fishermen fowlers with some few apothecaries surgeons cooks and bakers in a country of plantation first look about what kind of victual the country yields of itself to hand as chestnuts walnuts pineapples olives dates plums cherries wild honey and the like and  ... 
begin both because they ask less labor and because they serve for meat as well as for bread and of rice likewise cometh a great increase and it is a kind of meat above all there ought to be brought store of biscuit oat meal flour meal and the like  ... 
that is with certain allowance and let the main part of the ground employed to gardens or corn be to a common stock and to be laid in and stored up and then delivered out in proportion besides some spots of ground that any particular person will manure for his  ... 
virginia wood commonly aboundeth but too much and therefore timber is fit to be one if there be iron ore and streams whereupon to set the mills iron is a brave commodity where wood aboundeth making of bay salt if the climate be proper for it would be put in  ... 
not too much under ground for the hope of mines is very uncertain and useth to make the planters lazy in other things for government let it be in the hands of one assisted with some counsel and let them have commission to exercise martial laws with some limitation and  ... 
be rather noblemen and gentlemen than merchants for they look ever to the present gain let there be freedom from custom till the plantation be of strength and not only freedom from custom but freedom to carry their commodities where they may make their best of them except there be  ... 
to the health of some plantations that they have built along the sea and rivers in marish and unwholesome grounds therefore though you begin there to avoid carriage and like discommodities yet build still rather upwards from the streams than along it concerneth likewise the health of the plantation that  ... 
their favor by helping them to invade their enemies but for their defence it is not amiss and send oft of them over to the country that plants that they may see a better condition than their own and commend it when they return when the plantation grows to strength  ... 
the guiltiness of blood of many commiserable persons 
Of Riches
i cannot call riches better than the baggage of virtue the roman word is better impedimenta for as the baggage is to an army so is riches to virtue it cannot be spared nor left behind but it hindereth the march yea  ... 
of it with his eyes the personal fruition in any man cannot reach to feel great riches there is a custody of them or a power of dole and donative of them or a fame of them but no solid use to the owner do you not see what feigned  ... 
a strong hold in the imagination of the rich man but this is excellently expressed that it is in imagination and not always in fact for certainly great riches have sold more men than they have bought out seek not proud riches but such as thou mayest get justly use  ... 
divitias non erit insons the poets feign that when plutus which is riches is sent from jupiter he limps and goes slowly but when he is sent from pluto he runs and is swift of foot meaning that riches gotten by good means and just labor pace slowly but when  ... 
means they come upon speed the ways to enrich are many and most of them foul parsimony is one of the best and yet is not innocent for it withholdeth men from works of liberality and charity the improvement of the ground is the most natural obtaining of riches for  ... 
great sheep master a great timber man a great collier a great corn master a great lead man and so of iron and a number of the like points of husbandry so as the earth seemed a sea to him in respect of the perpetual importation it was truly observed  ... 
partner in the industries of younger men he cannot but increase mainly the gains of ordinary trades and vocations are honest and furthered by two things chiefly by diligence and by a good name for good and fair dealing but the gains of bargains are of a more doubtful nature  ... 
over again that commonly grindeth double both upon the seller and upon the buyer sharings do greatly enrich if the hands be well chosen that are trusted usury is the certainest means of gain though one of the worst as that whereby a man doth eat his bread in sudore  ... 
overgrowth in riches as it was with the first sugar man in the canaries therefore if a man can play the true logician to have as well judgment as invention he may do great matters especially if the times be fit he that resteth upon gains certain shall hardly grow  ... 
the party have intelligence what things are like to come into request and so store himself beforehand riches gotten by service though it be of the best rise yet when they are gotten by flattery feeding humors and other servile conditions they may be placed amongst the worst as for  ... 
none worse when they come to them be not penny wise riches have wings and sometimes they fly away of themselves sometimes they must be set flying to bring in more men leave their riches either to their kindred or to the public and moderate portions prosper best in both  ... 
alms which soon will putrefy and corrupt inwardly therefore measure not thine advancements by quantity but frame them by measure and defer not charities till death for certainly if a man weigh it rightly he that doth so is rather liberal of another man s than of his own 
Of Prophecies
i  ... 
aeneae cunctis dominabitur oris et nati natorum et qui nascentur ab illis a prophecy as it seems of the roman empire seneca the tragedian hath these verses venient annis saecula seris quibus oceanus vincula rerum laxet et ingens pateat tellus tiphysque novos detegat orbes nec sit terris ultima thule a  ... 
dreamed he sealed up bis wife s belly whereby he did expound it that his wife should be barren but aristander the soothsayer told him his wife was with child because men do not use to seal vessels that are empty a phantasm that appeared to m brutus in his  ... 
savior yet tacitus expounds it of vespasian domitian dreamed the night before he was slain that a golden head was growing out of the nape of his neck and indeed the succession that followed him for many years made golden times henry the sixth of england said of henry the  ... 
nativity to be calculated under a false name and the astrologer gave a judgment that he should be killed in a duel at which the queen laughed thinking her husband to be above challenges and duels but he was slain upon a course at tilt the splinters of the staff  ... 
principal letters of that word hempe which were henry edward mary philip and elizabeth england should come to utter confusion which thanks be to god is verified only in the change of the name for that the king s style is now no more of england but of britain there  ... 
shall you have none it was generally conceived to be meant of the spanish fleet that came in 88 for that the king of spain s surname as they say is norway the prediction of regiomontanus octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus was thought likewise accomplished in the sending of that great  ... 
him exceedingly there are numbers of the like kind especially if you include dreams and predictions of astrology but i have set down these few only of certain credit for example my judgment is that they ought all to be despised and ought to serve but for winter talk by  ... 
and some credit consisteth in three things first that men mark when they hit and never mark when they miss as they do generally also of dreams the second is that probable conjectures or obscure traditions many times turn themselves into prophecies while the nature of man which coveteth divination  ... 
adding thereto the tradition in plato s timaeus and his atlanticus it mought encourage one to turn it to a prediction the third and last which is the great one is that almost all of them being infinite in number have been impostures and by idle and crafty brains merely 
Of Ambition
 ... 
men if they find the way open for their rising and still get forward they are rather busy than dangerous but if they be checked in their desires they become secretly discontent and look upon men and matters with an evil eye and are best pleased when things go backward  ... 
natures at all for if they rise not with their service they will take order to make their service fall with them but since we have said it were good not to use men of ambitious natures except it be upon necessity it is fit we speak in what cases  ... 
screens to princes in matters of danger and envy for no man will take that part except he be like a seeled dove that mounts and mounts because he cannot see about him there is use also of ambitious men in pulling down the greatness of any subject that overtops  ... 
be noble and if they be rather harsh of nature than gracious and popular and if they be rather new raised than grown cunning and fortified in their greatness it is counted by some a weakness in princes to have favorites but it is of all others the best remedy  ... 
steady for without that ballast the ship will roll too much at the least a prince may animate and inure some meaner persons to be as it were scourges to ambitions men as for the having of them obnoxious to ruin if they be of fearful natures it may do  ... 
they may not know what to expect and be as it were in a wood of ambitions it is less harmful the ambition to prevail in great things than that other to appear in every thing for that breeds confusion and mars business but yet it is less danger to  ... 
honor hath three things in it the vantage ground to do good the approach to kings and principal persons and the raising of a man s own fortunes he that hath the best of these intentions when he aspireth is an honest man and that prince that can discern of 
Of Masques
 ... 
triumphs these things are but toys to come amongst such serious observations but yet since princes will have such things it is better they should be graced with elegancy than daubed with cost dancing to song is a thing of great state and pleasure i understand it that the song  ... 
strong and manly a base and a tenor no treble and the ditty high and tragical not nice or dainty several quires placed one over against another and taking the voice by catches anthem wise give great pleasure turning dances into figure is a childish curiosity and generally let it  ... 
eye before it be full of the same object let the scenes abound with light specially colored and varied and let the masquers or any other that are to come down from the scene have some motions upon the scene itself before their coming down for it draws the eye  ... 
and a kind of sea water green and oes or spangs as they are of no great cost so they are of most glory as for rich embroidery it is lost and not discerned let the suits of the masquers be graceful and such as become the person when the  ... 
is not comical enough to put them in anti masques and anything that is hideous as devils giants is on the other side as unfit but chiefly let the music of them be recreative and with some strange changes some sweet odors suddenly coming forth without any drops falling are  ... 
are chiefly in the chariots wherein the challengers make their entry especially if they be drawn with strange beasts as lions bears camels and the like or in the devices of their entrance or in the bravery of their liveries or in the goodly furniture of their horses and armor 
Of Nature
 ... 
too great nor too small tasks for the first will make him dejected by often failings and the second will make him a small proceeder though by often prevailings and at the first let him practise with helps as swimmers do with bladders or rushes but after a time let  ... 
say over the four and twenty letters when he was angry then to go less in quantity as if one should in forbearing wine come from drinking healths to a draught at a meal and lastly to discontinue altogether but if a man have the fortitude and resolution to enfranchise  ... 
a man force a habit upon himself with a perpetual continuance but with some intermission for both the pause reinforceth the new onset and if a man that is not perfect be ever in practice he shall as well practise his errors as his abilities and induce one habit of  ... 
turned from a cat to a woman who sat very demutely at the board s end till a mouse ran before her therefore let a man either avoid the occasion altogether or put himself often to it that he may be little moved with it a man s nature is  ... 
mea when they converse in those things they do not affect in studies whatsoever a man commandeth upon himself let him set hours for it but whatsoever is agreeable to his nature let him take no care for any set times for his thoughts will fly to it of themselves 
Of Custom
 ... 
learning and infused opinions but their deeds are after as they have been accustomed and therefore as machiavel well noteth though in an evil favored instance there is no trusting to the force of nature nor to the bravery of words except it be corroborate by custom his instance is  ... 
a jaureguy nor a baltazar gerard yet his rule holdeth still that nature nor the engagement of words are not so forcible as custom only superstition is now so well advanced that men of the first blood are as firm as butchers by occupation and votary resolution is made equipollent  ... 
only by the wheels of custom we see also the reign or tyranny of custom what it is the indians i mean the sect of their wise men lay themselves quietly upon a stock of wood and so sacrifice themselves by fire nay the wives strive to be burned with  ... 
that he might be hanged in a withe and not in an halter because it had been so used with former rebels there be monks in russia for penance that will sit a whole night in a vessel of water till they be engaged with hard ice many examples may  ... 
in effect but an early custom so we see in languages the tongue is more pliant to all expressions and sounds the joints are more supple to all feats of activity and motions in youth than afterwards for it is true that late learners cannot so well take the ply  ... 
greater for there example teacheth company comforteth emulation quickeneth glory raiseth so as in such places the force of custom is in his exaltation certainly the great multiplication of virtues upon human nature resteth upon societies well ordained and disciplined for commonwealths and good governments do nourish virtue grown but 
Of Fortune
 ... 
man s fortune is in his own hands faber quisque fortunae suae saith the poet and the most frequent of external causes is that the folly of one man is the fortune of another for no man prospers so suddenly as by others errors serpens nisi serpentem comederit non fit  ... 
that the wheels of his mind keep way with the wheels of his fortune for so livy after he had described cato major in these words in illo viro tantum robur corporis et animi fuit ut quocunque loco natus esset fortunam sibi facturus videretur falleth upon that that he had  ... 
asunder but giving light together so are there a number of little and scarce discerned virtues or rather faculties and customs that make men fortunate the italians note some of them such as a man would little think when they speak of one that cannot do amiss they will throw  ... 
for when a man placeth his thoughts without himself he goeth not his own way an hasty fortune maketh an enterpriser and remover the french hath it better entreprenant or remuant but the exercised fortune maketh the able man fortune is to be honored and respected and it be but  ... 
them and besides it is greatness in a man to be the care of the higher powers so caesar said to the pilot in the tempest caesarem portas et fortunam ejus so sylla chose the name of felix and not of magnus and it hath been noted that those who  ... 
afterwards certainly there be whose fortunes are like homer s verses that have a slide and easiness more than the verses of other poets as plutarch saith of timoleon s fortune in respect of that of agesilaus or epaminondas and that this shoulld be no doubt it is much in 
Of Usury
 ... 
virgil speaketh of ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent that the usurer breaketh the first law that was made for mankind after the fall which was in sudore vultus tui comedes panem tuum not in sudore vultus alieni that usurers should have orange tawny bonnets because they do judaize that  ... 
others have made suspicious and cunning propositions of banks discovery of men s estates and other inventions but few have spoken of usury usefully it is good to set before us the incommodities and commodities of usury that the good may be either weighed out or culled out and warily  ... 
part be employed upon merchandizing which is the vena porta of wealth in a state the second that it makes poor merchants for as a farmer cannot husband his ground so well if he sit at a great rent so the merchant cannot drive his trade so well if he  ... 
certainties and others at uncertainties at the end of the game most of the money will be in the box and ever a state flourisheth when wealth is more equally spread the fifth that it beats down the price of land for the employment of money is chiefly either merchandizing  ... 
time breeds a public poverty on the other side the commodities of usury are first that howsoever usury in some respect hindereth merchandizing yet in some other it advanceth it for it is certain that the greatest part of trade is driven by young merchants upon borrowing at interest so  ... 
forced to sell their means be it lands or goods far under foot and so whereas usury doth but gnaw upon them bad markets would swallow them quite up as for mortgaging or pawning it will little mend the matter for either men will not take pawns without use or  ... 
would be ordinary borrowing without profit and it is impossible to conceive the number of inconveniences that will ensue if borrowing be cramped therefore to speak of the abolishing of usury is idle all states have ever had it in one kind or rate or other so as that opinion  ... 
of usury be grinded that it bite not too much the other that there be left open a means to invite moneyed men to lend to the merchants for the continuing and quickening of trade this cannot be done except you introduce two several sorts of usury a less and  ... 
not so to serve both intentions the way would be briefly thus that there be two rates of usury the one free and general for all the other under license only to certain persons and in certain places of merchandizing first therefore let usury in general be reduced to five  ... 
part raise the price of land because land purchased at sixteen years purchase will yield six in the hundred and somewhat more whereas this rate of interest yields but five this by like reason will encourage and edge industrious and profitable improvements because many will rather venture in that kind  ... 
easy than that he used formerly to pay for by that means all borrowers shall have some ease by this reformation be he merchant or whosoever let it be no bank or common stock but every man be master of his own money not that i altogether mislike banks but  ... 
or nine in the hundred will sooner descend to eight in the hundred than give over his trade of usury and go from certain gains to gains of hazard let these licensed lenders be in number indefinite but restrained to certain principal cities and towns of merchandizing for then they  ... 
in a sort authorize usury which before was in some places but permissive the answer is that it is better to mitigate usury by declaration than to suffer it to rage by connivance 
Of Youth
and age a man that is young in years may be old in hours if he have  ... 
their minds better and as it were more divinely natures that have much heat and great and violent desires and perturbations are not ripe for action till they have passed the meridian of their years as it was with julius caesar and septimius severus of the latter of whom it  ... 
vivacity in age is an excellent composition for business young men are fitter to invent than to judge fitter for execution than for counsel and fitter for new projects than for settled business for the experience of age in things that fall within the compass of it directeth them but  ... 
than they can quiet fly to the end without consideration of the means and degrees pursue some few principles which they have chanced upon absurdly care not to innovate which draws unknown inconveniences use extreme remedies at first and that which doubleth all errors will not acknowledge or retract them  ... 
both for that will be good for the present because the virtues of either age may correct the defects of both and good for succession that young men may be learners while men in age are actors and lastly good for extern accidents because authority followeth old men and favor  ... 
old because vision is a clearer revelation than a dream and certainly the more a man drinketh of the world the more it intoxicateth and age doth profit rather in the powers of understanding than in the virtues of the will and affections there be some have an over early  ... 
grace in youth than in age such as is a fluent and luxuriant speech which becomes youth well but not age so tully saith of hortensius idem manebat neque idem decebat the third is of such as take too high a strain at the first and are magnanimous more than 
Of Beauty
 ... 
than beauty of aspect neither is it almost seen that very beautiful persons are otherwise of great virtue as if nature were rather busy not to err than in labor to produce excellency and therefore they prove accomplished but not of great spirit and study rather behavior than virtue but  ... 
that of color and that of decent and gracious motion more than that of favor that is the best part of beauty which a picture cannot express no nor the first sight of the life there is no excellent beauty that hath not some strangeness in the proportion a man  ... 
but i think a painter may make a better face than ever was but he must do it by a kind of felicity as a musician that maketh an excellent air in music and not by rule a man shall see faces that if you examine them part by part  ... 
pardon and considering the youth as to make up the comeliness beauty is as summer fruits which are easy to corrupt and cannot last and for the most part it makes a dissolute youth and an age a little out of countenance but yet certainly again if it light well 
Of Deformity
 ... 
is a consent between the body and the mind and where nature erreth in the one she ventureth in the other ubi peccat in uno periclitatur in altero but because there is in man an election touching the frame of his mind and a necessity in the frame of his  ... 
doth induce contempt hath also a perpetual spur in himself to rescue and deliver himself from scorn therefore all deformed persons are extreme bold first as in their own defence as being exposed to scorn but in process of time by a general habit also it stirreth in them industry  ... 
they should be in possibility of advancement till they see them in possession so that upon the matter in a great wit deformity is an advantage to rising kings in ancient times and at this present in some countries were wont to put great trust in eunuchs because they that  ... 
of spirit seek to free themselves from scorn which must be either by virtue or malice and therefore let it not be marvelled if sometimes they prove excellent persons as was agesilaus zanger the son of solyman aesop gasca president of peru and socrates may go likewise amongst them with 
Of Building
 ... 
a fair house upon an ill seat committeth himself to prison neither do i reckon it an ill seat only where the air is unwholesome but likewise where the air is unequal as you shall see many fine seats set upon a knap of ground environed with higher hills round  ... 
seat but ill ways ill markets and if you will consult with momus ill neighbors i speak not of many more want of water want of wood shade and shelter want of fruitfulness and mixture of grounds of several natures want of prospect want of level grounds want of places  ... 
dear where a man hath a great living laid together and where he is scanted all which as it is impossible perhaps to find together so it is good to know them and think of them that a man may take as many as he can and if he have  ... 
how do you in winter lucullus answered why do you not think me as wise as some fowl are that ever change their abode towards the winter to pass from the seat to the house itself we will do as cicero doth in the orator s art who writes books  ... 
escurial and some others be and yet scarce a very fair room in them first therefore i say you cannot have a perfect palace except you have two several sides a side for the banquet as it is spoken of in the book of hester and a side for the  ... 
midst of the front that as it were joineth them together on either hand i would have on the side of the banquet in front one only goodly room above stairs of some forty foot high and under it a room for a dressing or preparing place at times of  ... 
and a summer parlor both fair and under these rooms a fair and large cellar sunk under ground and likewise some privy kitchens with butteries and pantries and the like as for the tower i would have it two stories of eighteen foot high apiece above the two wings and  ... 
brass color and a very fair landing place at the top but this to be if you do not point any of the lower rooms for a dining place of servants for otherwise you shall have the servants dinner after your own for the steam of it will come up  ... 
building than the front and in all the four corners of that court fair staircases cast into turrets on the outside and not within the row of buildings themselves but those towers are not to be of the height of the front but rather proportionable to the lower building let  ... 
be all stately galleries in which galleries let there be three or five fine cupolas in the length of it placed at equal distance and fine colored windows of several works on the household side chambers of presence and ordinary entertainments with some bed chambers and let all three sides  ... 
full of glass that one cannot tell where to become to be out of the sun or cold for inbowed windows i hold them of good use in cities indeed upright do better in respect of the uniformity towards the street for they be pretty retiring places for conference and  ... 
and height which is to be environed with the garden on all sides and in the inside cloistered on all sides upon decent and beautiful arches as high as the first story on the under story towards the garden let it be turned to a grotto or a place of  ... 
the other court was these buildings to be for privy lodgings on both sides and the end for privy galleries whereof you must foresee that one of them be for an infirmary if the prince or any special person should be sick with chambers bed chamber antecamera and recamera joining  ... 
be two delicate or rich cabinets daintily paved richly hanged glazed with crystalline glass and a rich cupola in the midst and all other elegancy that may be thought upon in the upper gallery too i wish that there may be if the place will yield it some fountains running  ... 
with little turrets or rather embellishments upon the wall and a third court to make a square with the front but not to be built nor yet enclosed with a naked wall but enclosed with terraces leaded aloft and fairly garnished on the three sides and cloistered on the inside 
Of Gardens
 ... 
of man without which buildings and palaces are but gross handiworks and a man shall ever see that when ages grow to civility and elegancy men come to build stately sooner than to garden finely as if gardening were the greater perfection i do hold it in the royal ordering  ... 
trees yew pine apple trees fir trees rosemary lavender periwinkle the white the purple and the blue germander flags orangetrees lemon trees and myrtles if they be stoved and sweet marjoram warm set there followeth for the latter part of january and february the mezereon tree which then blossoms crocus  ... 
briar in april follow the double white violet the wallflower the stock gilliflower the cowslip flowerdelices and lilies of all natures rosemary flowers the tulippa the double peony the pale daffodil the french honeysuckle the cherry tree in blossom the damson and plum trees in blossom the white thorn in  ... 
satyrian with the white flower herba muscaria lilium convallium the apple tree in blossom in july come gilliflowers of all varieties musk roses the lime tree in blossom early pears and plums in fruit jennetings codlins in august come plums of all sorts in fruit pears apricocks berberries filberds musk  ... 
london but my meaning is perceived that you may have ver perpetuum as the place affords and because the breath of flowers is far sweeter in the air where it comes and goes like the warbling of music than in the hand therefore nothing is more fit for that delight  ... 
dew bays likewise yield no smell as they grow rosemary little nor sweet marjoram that which above all others yields the sweetest smell in the air is the violet specially the white double violet which comes twice a year about the middle of april and about bartholomew tide next to  ... 
are very delightful to be set under a parlor or lower chamber window then pinks and gilliflowers especially the matted pink and clove gilliflower then the flowers of the lime tree then the honeysuckles so they be somewhat afar off of beanflowers i speak not because they are field flowers  ... 
those which are indeed princelike as we have done of buildings the contents ought not well to be under thirty acres of ground and to be divided into three parts a green in the entrance a heath or desert in the going forth and the main garden in the midst  ... 
than green grass kept finely shorn the other because it will give you a fair alley in the midst by which you may go in front upon a stately hedge which is to enclose the garden but because the alley will be long and in great heat of the year  ... 
the garden as for the making of knots or figures with divers colored earths that they may lie under the windows of the house on that side which the garden stands they be but toys you may see as good sights many times in tarts the garden is best to  ... 
there be an entire hedge of some four foot high framed also upon carpenter s work and upon the upper hedge over every arch a little turret with a belly enough to receive a cage of birds and over every space between the arches some other little figure with broad  ... 
breadth of the ground but to leave on either side ground enough for diversity of side alleys unto which the two covert alleys of the green may deliver you but there must be no alleys with hedges at either end of this great enclosure not at the hither end for  ... 
you cast it into first it be not too busy or full of work wherein i for my part do not like images cut out in juniper or other garden stuff they be for children little low hedges round like welts with some pretty pyramids i like well and in  ... 
for four to walk abreast which i would have to be perfect circles without any bulwarks or embossments and the whole mount to be thirty foot high and some fine banqueting house with some chimneys neatly cast and without too much glass for fountains they are a great beauty and  ... 
or mud for the first the ornaments of images gilt or of marble which are in use do well but the main matter is so to convey the water as it never stay either in the bowls or in the cistern that the water be never by rest discolored green  ... 
pool it may admit much curiosity and beauty wherewith we will not trouble ourselves as that the bottom be finely paved and with images the sides likewise and withal embellished with colored glass and such things of lustre encompassed also with fine rails of low statuas but the main point  ... 
little and for fine devices of arching water without spilling and making it rise in several forms of feathers drinking glasses canopies and the like they be pretty things to look on but nothing to health and sweetness for the heath which was the third part of our plot i  ... 
prosper in the shade and these to be in the heath here and there not in any order i like also little heaps in the nature of mole hills such as are in wild heaths to be set some with wild thyme some with pinks some with germander that gives  ... 
of which heaps are to be with standards of little bushes pricked upon their top and part without the standards to be roses juniper holly berberries but here and there because of the smell of their blossoms red currants gooseberries rosemary bays sweetbriar and such like but these standards to  ... 
wind blows sharp you may walk as in a gallery and those alleys must be likewise hedged at both ends to keep out the wind and these closer alleys must be ever finely gravelled and no grass because of going wet in many of these alleys likewise you are to  ... 
the trees at the end of both the side grounds i would have a mount of some pretty height leaving the wall of the enclosure breast high to look abroad into the fields for the main garden i do not deny but there should be some fair alleys ranged on  ... 
for shade i would have you rest upon the alleys of the side grounds there to walk if you be disposed in the heat of the year or day but to make account that the main garden is for the more temperate parts of the year and in the heat  ... 
foulness appear in the floor of the aviary so i have made a platform of a princely garden partly by precept partly by drawing not a model but some general lines of it and in this i have spared for no cost but it is nothing for great princes that 
Of Negotiating
 ... 
mediation of a third than by a man s self letters are good when a man would draw an answer by letter back again or when it may serve for a man s justification afterwards to produce his own letter or where it may be danger to be interrupted or  ... 
a man will reserve to himself liberty either to disavow or to expound in choice of instruments it is better to choose men of a plainer sort that are like to do that that is committed to them and to report back again faithfully the success than those that are  ... 
men for expostulation fair spoken men for persuasion crafty men for inquiry and observation froward and absurd men for business that doth not well bear out itself use also such as have been lucky and prevailed before in things wherein you have employed them for that breeds confidence and they  ... 
where they would be if a man deal with another upon conditions the start or first performance is all which a man cannot reasonably demand except either the nature of the thing be such which must go before or else a man can persuade the other party that he shall  ... 
would work any man you must either know his nature and fashions and so lead him or his ends and so persuade him or his weakness and disadvantages and so awe him or those that have interest in him and so govern him in dealing with cunning persons we must 
Of Followers and Friends
 ... 
costly followers are not to be liked lest while a man maketh his train longer he make his wings shorter i reckon to be costly not them alone which charge the purse but which are wearisome and importune in suits ordinary followers ought to challenge no higher conditions than countenance  ... 
themselves as trumpets of the commendation of those they follow are full of inconvenience for they taint business through want of secrecy and they export honor from a man and make him a return in envy there is a kind of followers likewise which are dangerous being indeed espials which  ... 
him that hath been employed in the wars and the like hath ever been a thing civil and well taken even in monarchies so it be without too much pomp or popularity but the most honorable kind of following is to be followed as one that apprehendeth to advance virtue  ... 
that in government it is good to use men of one rank equally for to countenance some extraordinarily is to make them insolent and the rest discontent because they may claim a due but contrariwise in favor to use men with much difference and election is good for it maketh  ... 
it shows softness and gives a freedom to scandal and disreputation for those that would not censure or speak ill of a man immediately will talk more boldly of those that are so great with them and thereby wound their honor yet to be distracted with many is worse for  ... 
between equals which was wont to be magnified that that is is between superior and inferior whose fortunes may comprehend the one the other 
Of Suitors
many ill matters and projects are undertaken and private suits do putrefy the public good many good matters are undertaken with bad minds i mean not  ... 
at least to make use in the meantime of the suitor s hopes some take hold of suits only for an occasion to cross some other or to make an information whereof they could not otherwise have apt pretext without care what become of the suit when that turn is  ... 
suit either a right of equity if it be a suit of controversy or a right of desert if it be a suit of petition if affection lead a man to favor the wrong side in justice let him rather use his countenance to compound the matter than to carry  ... 
he may deal in them with honor but let him choose well his referendaries for else he may be led by the nose suitors are so distasted with delays and abuses that plain dealing in denying to deal in suits at first and reporting the success barely and in challenging  ... 
by him advantage be not taken of the note but the party left to his other means and in some sort recompensed for his discovery to be ignorant of the value of a suit is simplicity as well as to be ignorant of the right thereof is want of conscience  ... 
but in respect of those which are like to cross it let a man in the choice of his mean rather choose the fittest mean than the greatest mean and rather them that deal in certain things than those that are general the reparation of a denial is sometimes equal  ... 
the suitor will not in the conclusion lose both the suitor and his own former favor nothing is thought so easy a request to a great person as his letter and yet if it be not in a good cause it is so much out of his reputation there are 
Of Studies
 ... 
in the judgment and disposition of business for expert men can execute and perhaps judge of particulars one by one but the general counsels and the plots and marshalling of affairs come best from those that are learned to spend too much time in studies is sloth to use them  ... 
except they be bounded in by experience crafty men contemn studies simple men admire them and wise men use them for they teach not their own use but that is a wisdom without them and above them won by observation read not to contradict and confute nor to believe and  ... 
and some few to be read wholly and with diligence and attention some books also may be read by deputy and extracts made of them by others but that would be only in the less important arguments and the meaner sort of books else distilled books are like common distilled  ... 
have much cunning to seem to know that he doth not histories make men wise poets witty the mathematics subtile natural philosophy deep moral grave logic and rhetoric able to contend abeunt studia in mores nay there is no stond or impediment in the wit but may be wrought out  ... 
the mathematics for in demonstrations if his wit be called away never so little he must begin again if his wit be not apt to distinguish or find differences let him study the schoolmen for they are cymini sectores if he be not apt to beat over matters and to 
Of Faction
 ... 
according to the respect of factions is a principal part of policy whereas contrariwise the chiefest wisdom is either in ordering those things which are general and wherein men of several factions do nevertheless agree or in dealing with correspondence to particular persons one by one but i say not  ... 
is most passable with the other commonly giveth best way the lower and weaker faction is the firmer in conjunction and it is often seen that a few that are stiff do tire out a greater number that are more moderate when one of the factions is extinguished the remaining  ... 
and octavianus caesar against brutus and cassius held out likewise for a time but when brutus and cassius were overthrown then soon after antonius and octavianus brake and subdivided these examples are of wars but the same holdeth in private factions and therefore those that are seconds in factions do  ... 
that by which they enter thinking belike that they have the first sure and now are ready for a new purchase the traitor in faction lightly goeth away with it for when matters have stuck long in balancing the winning of some one man casteth them and he getteth all  ... 
take it to be a sign of one that meaneth to refer all to the greatness of his own house kings had need beware how they side themselves and make themselves as of a faction or party for leagues within the state are ever pernicious to monarchies for they raise  ... 
authority and business the motions of factions under kings ought to be like the motions as the astronomers speak of the inferior orbs which may have their proper motions but yet still are quietly carried by the higher motion of primum mobile 
Of Ceremonies and Respects
he that is only real had need have  ... 
purses for light gains come thick whereas great come but now and then so it is true that small matters win great commendation because they are continually in use and in note whereas the occasion of any great virtue cometh but on festivals therefore it doth much add to a  ... 
to express them he shall lose their grace which is to be natural and unaffected some men s behavior is like a verse wherein every syllable is measured how can a man comprehend great matters that breaketh his mind too much to small observations not to use ceremonies at all  ... 
him that speaks and certainly there is a kind of conveying of effectual and imprinting passages amongst compliments which is of singular use if a man can hit upon it amongst a man s peers a man shall be sure of familiarity and therefore it is good a little to  ... 
so it be with demonstration that a man doth it upon regard and not upon facility it is a good precept generally in seconding another yet to add somewhat of one s own as if you will grant his opinion let it be with some distinction if you will follow  ... 
of their greater virtues it is loss also in business to be too full of respects or to be curious in observing times and opportunities solomon saith he that considereth the wind shall not sow and he that looketh to the clouds shall not reap a wise man will make 
Of Praise
 ... 
it is commonly false and naught and rather followeth vain persons than virtuous for the common people understand not many excellent virtues the lowest virtues draw praise from them the middle virtues work in them astonishment or admiration but of the highest virtues they have no sense of perceiving at  ... 
it fireth all round about and will not easily away for the odors of ointments are more durable than those of flowers there be so many false points of praise that a man may justly hold it a suspect some praises proceed merely of flattery and if he be an  ... 
impudent flatterer look wherein a man is conscious to himself that he is most defective and is most out of countenance in himself that will the flatterer entitle him to perforce spreta conscientia some praises come of good wishes and respects which is a form due in civility to kings  ... 
he that was praised to his hurt should have a push rise upon his nose as we say that a blister will rise upon one s tongue that tells a lie certainly moderate praise used with opportunity and not vulgar is that which doth the good solomon saith he that  ... 
man s office or profession he may do it with good grace and with a kind of magnanimity the cardinals of rome which are theologues and friars and schoolmen have a phrase of notable contempt and scorn towards civil business for they call all temporal business of wars embassages judicature  ... 
of his calling he saith magnificabo apostolatum meum 
Of Vain-glory
it was prettily devised of aesop the fly sat upon the axle tree of the chariot wheel and said what a dust do i raise so are there some vain persons that whatsoever goeth alone or moveth upon greater means if they  ... 
according to the french proverb beaucoup de bruit peu de fruit much bruit little fruit yet certainly there is use of this quality in civil affairs where there is an opinion and fame to be created either of virtue or greatness these men are good trumpeters again as titus livius  ... 
the other and sometimes he that deals between man and man raiseth his own credit with both by pretending greater interest than he hath in either and in these and the like kinds it often falls out that somewhat is produced of nothing for lies are sufficient to breed opinion  ... 
are of solid and sober natures have more of the ballast than of the sail in fame of learning the flight will be slow without some feathers of ostentation qui de contemnenda gloria libros scribunt nomen suum inscribunt socrates aristotle galen were men full of ostentation certainly vain glory helpeth  ... 
unto varnish that makes ceilings not only shine but last but all this while when i speak of vain glory i mean not of that property that tacitus doth attribute to mucianus omnium quae dixerat feceratque arte quadam ostentator for that proceeds not of vanity but of natural magnanimity and  ... 
that wherein a man s self hath any perfection for saith pliny very wittily in commending another you do yourself right for he that you commend is either superior to you in that you commend or inferior if he be inferior if he be to be commended you much more 
Of Honor and Reputation
 ... 
and worth without disadvantage for some in their actions do woo and effect honor and reputation which sort of men are commonly much talked of but inwardly little admired and some contrariwise darken their virtue in the show of it so as they be undervalued in opinion if a man  ... 
actions as in some one of them he doth content every faction or combination of people the music will be the fuller a man is an ill husband of bis honor that entereth into any action the failing wherein may disgrace him more than the carrying of it through can  ... 
reputation omnis fama a domesticis emanat envy which is the canker of honor is best extinguished by declaring a man s self in his ends rather to seek merit than fame and by attributing a man s successes rather to divine providence and felicity than to his own virtue or  ... 
govern by their ordinances after they are gone such were lycurgus solon justinian eadgar alphonsus of castile the wise that made the siete partidas in the third place are liberatores or salvatores such as compound the long miseries of civil wars or deliver their countries from servitude of strangers or  ... 
which reign justly and make the times good wherein they live both which last kinds need no examples they are in such number degrees of honor in subjects are first participes curarum those upon whom princes do discharge the greatest weight of their affairs their right hands as we call  ... 
such as have great places under princes and execute their places with sufficiency there is an honor likewise which may be ranked amongst the greatest which happeneth rarely that is of such as sacrifice themselves to death or danger for the good of their country as was m regulus and 
Of Judicature
 ... 
stick to add and alter and to pronounce that which they do not find and by show of antiquity to introduce novelty judges ought to be more learned than witty more reverend than plausible and more advised than confident above all things integrity is their portion and proper virtue cursed  ... 
these do but corrupt the stream the other corrupteth the fountain so with solomon fons turbatus et vena corrupta est justus cadens in causa sua coram adversario the office of judges may have reference unto the parties that use unto the advocates that plead unto the clerks and ministers of  ... 
principal duty of a judge is to suppress force and fraud whereof force is the more pernicious when it is open and fraud when it is close and disguised add thereto contentious suits which ought to be spewed out as the surfeit of courts a judge ought to prepare his  ... 
that he may plant his judgment as upon an even ground qui fortiter emungit elicit sanguinem and where the wine press is hard wrought it yields a harsh wine that tastes of the grape stone judges must beware of hard constructions and strained inferences for there is no worse torture  ... 
are a shower of snares upon the people therefore let penal laws if they have been sleepers of long or if they be grown unfit for the present time be by wise judges confined in the execution judicis officium est ut res ita tempora rerum etc in causes of life  ... 
and an overspeaking judge is no well tuned cymbal it is no grace to a judge first to find that which he might have heard in due time from the bar or to show quickness of conceit in cutting off evidence or counsel too short or to prevent information by  ... 
too much and proceedeth either of glory and willingness to speak or of impatience to hear or of shortness of memory or of want of a staid and equal attention it is a strange thing to see that the boldness of advocates should prevail with judges whereas they should imitate  ... 
and gracing where causes are well handled and fair pleaded especially towards the side which obtaineth not for that upholds in the client the reputation of his counsel and beats down in him the conceit of his cause there is likewise due to the public a civil reprehension of advocates  ... 
not the judge meet the cause half way nor give occasion to the party to say his counsel or proofs were not heard thirdly for that that concerns clerks and ministers the place of justice is an hallowed place and therefore not only the bench but the foot place and  ... 
courts is subject to four bad instruments first certain persons that are sowers of suits which make the court swell and the country pine the second sort is of those that engage courts in quarrels of jurisdiction and are not truly amici curiae but parasiti curiae in puffing a court  ... 
oblique lines and labyrinths and the fourth is the poller and exacter of fees which justifies the common resemblance of the courts of justice to the bush whereunto while the sheep flies for defence in weather he is sure to lose part of his fleece on the other side an  ... 
the conclusion of the roman twelve tables salus populi suprema lex and to know that laws except they be in order to that end are but things captious and oracles not well inspired therefore it is an happy thing in a state when kings and states do often consult with  ... 
meum and tuum when the reason and consequence thereof may trench to point of estate i call matter of estate not only the parts of sovereignty but whatsoever introduceth any great alteration or dangerous precedent or concerneth manifestly any great portion of people and let no man weakly conceive that  ... 
they do not check or oppose any points of sovereignty let not judges also be ignorant of their own right as to think there is not left to them as a principal part of their office a wise use and application of laws for they may remember what the apostle 
Of Anger
 ... 
must be limited and confined both in race and in time we will first speak how the natural inclination and habit to be angry may be attempted and calmed secondly how the particular motions of anger may be repressed or at least refrained from doing mischief thirdly how to raise  ... 
seneca saith well that anger is like ruin which breaks itself upon that it falls the scripture exhorteth us to possess our souls in patience whosoever is out of patience is out of possession of his soul men must not turn bees animasque in vulnere ponunt anger is certainly a  ... 
below it which is a thing easily done if a man will give law to himself in it for the second point the causes and motives of anger are chiefly three first to be too sensible of hurt for no man is angry that feels not himself hurt and therefore  ... 
putteth an edge upon anger as much or more than the hurt itself and therefore when men are ingenious in picking out circumstances of contempt they do kindle their anger much lastly opinion of the touch of a man s reputation doth multiply and sharpen anger wherein the remedy is  ... 
a time for it and so to still himself in the meantime and reserve it to contain anger from mischief though it take hold of a man there be two things whereof you must have special caution the one of extreme bitterness of words especially if they be aculeate and  ... 
act anything that is not revocable for raising and appeasing anger in another it is done chiefly by choosing of times when men are frowardest and worst disposed to incense them again by gathering as was touched before all that you can find out to aggravate the contempt and the  ... 
it to misunderstanding fear passion or what you will 
Of Vicissitude of Things
solomon saith there is no new thing upon the earth so that as plato had an imagination that all knowledge was but remembrance so solomon giveth his sentence that all novelty is but oblivion whereby you may see that the river  ... 
the other that the diurnal motion perpetually keepeth time no individual would last one moment certain it is that the matter is in a perpetual flux and never at a stay the great winding sheets that bury all things in oblivion are two deluges and earthquakes as for conflagrations and  ... 
narrow but in the other two destructions by deluge and earthquake it is further to be noted that the remnant of people which hap to be reserved are commonly ignorant and mountainous people that can give no account of the time past so that the oblivion is all one as  ... 
was not by earthquakes as the egyptian priest told solon concerning the island of atlantis that it was swallowed by an earthquake but rather that it was desolated by a particular deluge for earthquakes are seldom in those parts but on the other side they have such pouring rivers as  ... 
the jealousy of sects doth much extinguish the memory of things traducing gregory the great that he did what in him lay to extinguish all heathen antiquities i do not find that those zeals do any great effects nor last long as it appeared in the succession of sabinian who  ... 
the fume of those that conceive the celestial bodies have more accurate influences upon these things below than indeed they have but in gross comets out of question have likewise power and effect over the gross and mass of things but they are rather gazed upon and waited upon in  ... 
not have it given over but waited upon a little they say it is observed in the low countries i know not in what part that every five and thirty years the same kind and suit of years and weathers come about again as great frosts great wet great droughts  ... 
men is the vicissitude of sects and religions for those orbs rule in men s minds most the true religion is built upon the rock the rest are tossed upon the waves of time to speak therefore of the causes of new sects and to give some counsel concerning them  ... 
doubt the springing up of a new sect if then also there should arise any extravagant and strange spirit to make himself author thereof all which points held when mahomet published his law if a new sect have not two properties fear it not for it will not spread the  ... 
upon men s wits yet they do not produce any great alterations in states except it be by the help of civil occasions there be three manner of plantations of new sects by the power of signs and miracles by the eloquence and wisdom of speech and persuasion and by  ... 
abuses to compound the smaller differences to proceed mildly and not with sanguinary persecutions and rather to take off the principal authors by winning and advancing them than to enrage them by violence and bitterness the changes and vicissitude in wars are many but chiefly in three things in the  ... 
we read but of two incursions of theirs the one to gallo grecia the other to rome but east and west have no certain points of heaven and no more have the wars either from the east or west any certainty of observation but north and south are fixed and  ... 
continents that are upon the north whereas the south part for aught that is known is almost all sea or which is most apparent of the cold of the northern parts which is that which without aid of discipline doth make the bodies hardest and the courages warmest upon the  ... 
ruin and they become a prey so was it in the decay of the roman empire and likewise in the empire of almaigne after charles the great every bird taking a feather and were not unlike to befall to spain if it should break the great accessions and unions of  ... 
such as commonly will not marry or generate except they know means to live as it is almost everywhere at this day except tartary there is no danger of inundations of people but when there be great shoals of people which go on to populate without foreseeing means of life  ... 
warlike state grows soft and effeminate they may be sure of a war for commonly such states are grownm rich in the time of their degenerating and so the prey inviteth and their decay in valor encourageth a war as for the weapons it hardly falleth under rule and observation  ... 
china above two thousand years the conditions of weapons and their improvement are first the fetching afar off for that outruns the danger as it is seen in ordnance and muskets secondly the strength of the percussion wherein likewise ordnance do exceed all arietations and ancient inventions the third is  ... 
days for pitched fields and so trying it out upon an even match and they were more ignorant in ranging and arraying their battles after they grew to rest upon number rather competent than vast they grew to advantages of place cunning diversions and the like and they grew more  ... 
is but beginning and almost childish then his youth when it is luxuriant and juvenile then his strength of years when it is solid and reduced and lastly his old age when it waxeth dry and exhaust but it is not good to look too long upon these turning wheels 
Of Fame
 ... 
many feathers she hath so many eyes she hath underneath so many tongues so many voices she pricks up so many ears this is a flourish there follow excellent parables as that she gathereth strength in going that she goeth upon the ground and yet hideth her head in the  ... 
the giants that made war against jupiter and were by him destroyed thereupon in an anger brought forth fame for certain it is that rebels figured by the giants and seditious fames and libels are but brothers and sisters masculine and feminine but now if a man can tame this  ... 
the politics a place less handled and more worthy to be handled than this of fame we will therefore speak of these points what are false fames and what are true fames and how they may be best discerned how fames may be sown and raised how they may be  ... 
he scattered that vitellius had in purpose to remove the legions of syria into germany and the legions of germany into syria whereupon the legions of syria were infinitely inflamed julius caesar took pompey unprovided and laid asleep his industry and preparations by a fame that he cunningly gave out  ... 
upon recovery and amendment and it is an usual thing with the pashas to conceal the death of the great turk from the janizaries and men of war to save the sacking of constantinople and other towns as their manner is themistocles made xerxes king of persia post apace out  ... 
let all wise governors have as great a watch and care over fames as they have of the actions and designs themselves 
