
Of Truth
yet there remain certain discoursing wits which are of the same veins though there be not so much blood in them as was in those of the ancients but it is not only the difficulty and labor which men take in finding out of truth nor again that when it  ... 
love lies where neither they make for pleasure as with poets nor for advantage as with the merchant but for the lie s sake but i cannot tell this same truth is a naked and open day light that doth not show the masks and mummeries and triumphs of the  ... 
add pleasure doth any man doubt that if there were taken out of men s minds vain opinions flattering hopes false valuations imaginations as one would and the like but it would leave the minds of a number of men poor shrunken things full of melancholy and indisposition and unpleasing  ... 
that doth the hurt such as we spake of before but howsoever these things are thus in men s depraved judgments and affections yet truth which only doth judge itself teacheth that the inquiry of truth which is the love making or wooing of it the knowledge of truth which  ... 
work ever since is the illumination of his spirit first he breathed light upon the face of the matter or chaos then he breathed light into the face of man and still he breatheth and inspireth light into the face of his chosen the poet that beautified the sect that  ... 
is comparable to the standing upon the vantage ground of truth a hill not to be commanded and where the air is always clear and serene and to see the errors and wanderings and mists and tempests in the vale below so always that this prospect be with pity and  ... 
that practise it not that clear and round dealing is the honor of man s nature and that mixture of falsehoods is like alloy in coin of gold and silver which may make the metal work the better but it embaseth it for these winding and crooked courses are the  ... 
should be such a disgrace and such an odious charge saith he if it be well weighed to say that a man lieth is as much to say as that he is brave towards god and a coward towards men for a lie faces god and shrinks from man surely 
Of Death
 ... 
fear death as children fear to go in the dark and as that natural fear in children is increased with tales so is the other certainly the contemplation of death as the wages of sin and passage to another world is holy and religious but the fear of it as  ... 
pressed or tortured and thereby imagine what the pains of death are when the whole body is corrupted and dissolved when many times death passeth with less pain than the torture of a limb for the most vital parts are not the quickest of sense and by him that spake  ... 
mind of man so weak but it mates and masters the fear of death and therefore death is no such terrible enemy when a man hath so many attendants about him that can win the combat of him revenge triumphs over death love slights it honor aspireth to it grief  ... 
feceris mori velle non tantum fortis aut miser sed etiam fastidiosus potest a man would die though he were neither valiant nor miserable only upon a weariness to do the same thing so oft over and over it is no less worthy to observe how little alteration in good spirits  ... 
sitting upon the stool ut puto deus fio galba with a sentence feri si ex re sit populi romani holding forth his neck septimius severus in despatch adeste si quid mihi restat agendum and the like certainly the stoics bestowed too much cost upon death and by their great preparations  ... 
that is wounded in hot blood who for the time scarce feels the hurt and therefore a mind fixed and bent upon somewhat that is good doth avert the dolors of death but above all believe it the sweetest canticle is nunc dimittis when a man hath obtained worthy ends 
Of Unity
 ... 
about religion were evils unknown to the heathen the reason was because the religion of the heathen consisted rather in rites and ceremonies than in any constant belief for you may imagine what kind of faith theirs was when the chief doctors and fathers of their church were the poets  ... 
the fruits of unity next unto the well pleasing of god which is all in all are two the one towards those that are without the church the other towards those that are within for the former it is certain that heresies and schisms are of all others the greatest  ... 
of unity and therefore whensoever it cometh to that pass that one saith ecce in deserto another saith ecce in penetralibus that is when some men seek christ in the conventicles of heretics and others in an outward face of a church that voice had need continually to sound in  ... 
certainly it is little better when atheists and profane persons do hear of so many discordant and contrary opinions in religion it doth avert them from the church and maketh them to sit down in the chair of the scorners it is but a light thing to be vouched in  ... 
cringe by themselves which cannot but move derision in worldlings and depraved politics who are apt to contemn holy things as for the fruit towards those that are within it is peace which containeth infinite blessings it establisheth faith it kindleth charity the outward peace of the church distilleth into  ... 
peace jehu what hast thou to do with peace turn thee behind me peace is not the matter but following and party contrariwise certain laodiceans and lukewarm persons think they may accommodate points of religion by middle way and taking part of both and witty reconcilements as if they would  ... 
that is not against us is with us that is if the points fundamental and of substance in religion were truly discerned and distinguished from points not merely of faith but of opinion order or good intention this is a thing may seem to many a matter trivial and done  ... 
point controverted is too small and light not worth the heat and strife about it kindled only by contradiction for as it is noted by one of the fathers christ s coat indeed had no seam but the church s vesture was of divers colors whereupon he saith in veste  ... 
judgment and understanding shall sometimes hear ignorant men differ and know well within himself that those which so differ mean one thing and yet they themselves would never agree and if it come so to pass in that distance of judgment which is between man and man shall we not  ... 
profanas vocum novitates et oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae men create oppositions which are not and put them into new terms so fixed as whereas the meaning ought to govern the term the term in effect governeth the meaning there be also two false peaces or unities the one when the  ... 
s image they may cleave but they will not incorporate concerning the means of procuring unity men must beware that in the procuring or reuniting of religious unity they do not dissolve and deface the laws of charity and of human society there be two swords amongst christians the spiritual  ... 
in cases of overt scandal blasphemy or intermixture of practice against the state much less to nourish seditions to authorize conspiracies and rebellions to put the sword into the people s hands and the like tending to the subversion of all government which is the ordinance of god for this  ... 
would he have said if he had known of the massacre in france or the powder treason of england he would have been seven times more epicure and atheist than he was for as the temporal sword is to be drawn with great circumspection in cases of religion so it  ... 
him in saying i will descend and be like the prince of darkness and what is it better to make the cause of religion to descend to the cruel and execrable actions of murthering princes butchery of people and subversion of states and governments surely this is to bring down  ... 
by their sword and all learnings both christian and moral as by their mercury rod do damn and send to hell for ever those facts and opinions tending to the support of the same as hath been already in good part done surely in counsels concerning religion that counsel of 
Of Revenge
 ... 
justice which the more man s nature runs to the more ought law to weed it out for as for the first wrong it doth but offend the law but the revenge of that wrong putteth the law out of office certainly in taking revenge a man is but even  ... 
enough to do with things present and to come therefore they do but trifle with themselves that labor in past matters there is no man doth a wrong for the wrong s sake but thereby to purchase himself profit or pleasure or honor or the like therefore why should i  ... 
for those wrongs which there is no law to remedy but then let a man take heed the revenge be such as there is no law to punish else a man s enemy is still before hand and it is two for one some when they take revenge are desirous  ... 
a desperate saying against perfidious or neglecting friends as if those wrongs were unpardonable you shall read saith he that we are commanded to forgive our enemies but you never read that we are commanded to forgive our friends but yet the spirit of job was in a better tune  ... 
the most part fortunate as that for the death of caesar for the death of pertinax for the death of henry the third of france and many more but in private revenges it is not so nay rather vindictive persons live the life of witches who as they are mischievous 
Of Adversity
 ... 
be the command over nature they appear most in adversity it is yet a higher speech of his than the other much too high for a heathen it is true greatness to have in one the frailty of a man and the security of a god vere magnum habere fragilitatem  ... 
to have some approach to the state of a christian that hercules when he went to unbind prometheus by whom human nature is represented sailed the length of the great ocean in an earthen pot or pitcher lively describing christian resolution that saileth in the frail bark of the flesh  ... 
greater benediction and the clearer revelation of god s favor yet even in the old testament if you listen to david s harp you shall hear as many hearse like airs as carols and the pencil of the holy ghost hath labored more in describing the afflictions of job than  ... 
upon a lightsome ground judge therefore of the pleasure of the heart by the pleasure of the eye certainly virtue is like precious odors most fragrant when they are incensed or crushed for prosperity doth best discover vice but adversity doth best discover virtue 
Of Simulation and Dissimulation
dissimulation is but a faint kind  ... 
of her son attributing arts or policy to augustus and dissimulation to tiberius and again when mucianus encourageth vespasian to take arms against vitellius he saith we rise not against the piercing judgment of augustus nor the extreme caution or closeness of tiberius these properties of arts or policy and  ... 
when which indeed are arts of state and arts of life as tacitus well calleth them to him a habit of dissimulation is a hinderance and a poorness but if a man cannot obtain to that judgment then it is left to bim generally to be close and a dissembler  ... 
a name of certainty and veracity but then they were like horses well managed for they could tell passing well when to stop or turn and at such times when they thought the case indeed required dissimulation if then they used it it came to pass that the former opinion  ... 
the second dissimulation in the negative when a man lets fall signs and arguments that he is not that he is and the third simulation in the affirmative when a man industriously and expressly feigns and pretends to be that he is not for the first of these secrecy it  ... 
the revealing is not for worldly use but for the ease of a man s heart so secret men come to the knowledge of many things in that kind while men rather discharge their minds than impart their minds in few words mysteries are due to secrecy besides to say  ... 
talk what he knoweth not therefore set it down that an habit of secrecy is both politic and moral and in this part it is good that a man s face give his tongue leave to speak for the discovery of a man s self by the tracts of his  ... 
some degree for men are too cunning to suffer a man to keep an indifferent carriage between both and to be secret without swaying the balance on either side they will so beset a man with questions and draw him on and pick it out of him that without an  ... 
scope of dissimulation which is as it were but the skirts or train of secrecy but for the third degree which is simulation and false profession that i hold more culpable and less politic except it be in great and rare matters and therefore a general custom of simulation which  ... 
of simulation and dissimulation are three first to lay asleep opposition and to surprise for where a man s intentions are published it is an alarum to call up all that are against them the second is to reserve to a man s self a fair retreat for if a  ... 
speech to freedom of thought and therefore it is a good shrewd proverb of the spaniard tell a lie and find a troth as if there were no way of discovery but by simulation there be also three disadvantages to set it even the first that simulation and dissimulation commonly  ... 
own ends the third and greatest is that it depriveth a man of one of the most principal instruments for action which is trust and belief the best composition and temperature is to have openness in fame and opinion secrecy in habit dissimulation in seasonable use and a power to 
Of Parents
 ... 
mitigate the remembrance of death the perpetuity by generation is common to beasts but memory merit and noble works are proper to men and surely a man shall see the noblest works and foundations have proceeded from childless men which have sought to express the images of their minds where  ... 
both children and creatures the difference in affection of parents towards their several children is many times unequal and sometimes unworthy especially in the mothers as solomon saith a wise son rejoiceth the father but an ungracious son shames the mother a man shall see where there is a house  ... 
them with shifts makes them sort with mean company and makes them surfeit more when they come to plenty and therefore the proof is best when men keep their authority towards the children but not their purse men have a foolish manner both parents and schoolmasters and servants in creating  ... 
body and to say truth in nature it is much a like matter insomuch that we see a nephew sometimes resembleth an uncle or a kinsman more than his own parent as the blood happens let parents choose betimes the vocations and courses they mean their children should take for  ... 
good not to cross it but generally the precept is good optimum elige suave et facile illud faciet consuetudo younger brothers are commonly fortunate but seldom or never where the elder are disinherited 
Of Marriage
and single life he that hath wife and children hath given hostages to fortune for they are  ... 
should have greatest care of future times unto which they know they must transmit their dearest pledges some there are who though they lead a single life yet their thoughts do end with themselves and account future times impertinences nay there are some other that account wife and children but  ... 
yea but he hath a great charge of children as if it were an abatement to his riches but the most ordinary cause of a single life is liberty especially in certain self pleasing and humorous minds which are so sensible of every restraint as they will go near to  ... 
water the ground where it must first fill a pool it is indifferent for judges and magistrates for if they be facile and corrupt you shall have a servant five times worse than a wife for soldiers i find the generals commonly in their hortatives put men in mind of  ... 
the other side they are more cruel and hardhearted good to make severe inquisitors because their tenderness is not so oft called upon grave natures led by custom and therefore constant are commonly loving husbands as was said of ulysses vetulam suam praetulit immortalitati chaste women are often proud and  ... 
and old men s nurses so as a man may have a quarrel to marry when he will but yet he was reputed one of the wise men that made answer to the question when a man should marry a young man not yet an elder man not at all  ... 
against their friends consent for then they will be sure to make good their own folly 
Of Envy
there be none of the affections which have been noted to fascinate or bewitch but love and envy they both have vehement wishes they frame themselves readily into imaginations and suggestions and they come  ... 
there seemeth to be acknowledged in the act of envy an ejaculation or irradiation of the eye nay some have been so curious as to note that the times when the stroke or percussion of an envious eye doth most hurt are when the party envied is beheld in glory  ... 
what persons are apt to envy others what persons are most subject to be envied themselves and what is the difference between public and private envy a man that hath no virtue in himself ever envieth virtue in others for men s minds will either feed upon their own good  ... 
know much of other men s matters cannot be because all that ado may concern his own estate therefore it must needs be that he taketh a kind of play pleasure in looking upon the fortunes of others neither can he that mindeth but his own business find much matter  ... 
of the eye that when others come on they think themselves go back deformed persons and eunuchs and old men and bastards are envious for he that cannot possibly mend his own case will do what he can to impair another s except these defects light upon a very brave  ... 
lame men the same is the case of men that rise after calamities and misfortunes for they are as men fallen out with the times and think other men s harms a redemption of their own sufferings they that desire to excel in too many matters out of levity and  ... 
near kinsfolks and fellows in office and those that have been bred together are more apt to envy their equals when they are raised for it doth upbraid unto them their own fortunes and pointeth at them and cometh oftener into their remembrance and incurreth likewise more into the note  ... 
more or less subject to envy first persons of eminent virtue when they are advanced are less envied for their fortune seemeth but due unto them and no man envieth the payment of a debt but rewards and liberality rather again envy is ever joined with the comparing of a  ... 
most envied when their fortune continueth long for by that time though their virtue be the same yet it hath not the same lustre for fresh men grow up that darken it persons of noble blood are less envied in their rising for it seemeth but right done to their  ... 
and per saltum those that have joined with their honor great travels cares or perils are less subject to envy for men think that they earn their honors hardly and pity them sometimes and pity ever healeth envy wherefore you shall observe that the more deep and sober sort of  ... 
call unto themselves for nothing increaseth envy more than an unnecessary and ambitious engrossing of business and nothing doth extinguish envy more than for a great person to preserve all other inferior officers in their full lights and pre eminences of their places for by that means there be so  ... 
competition whereas wise men will rather do sacrifice to envy in suffering themselves sometimes of purpose to be crossed and overborne in things that do not much concern them notwithstanding so much is true that the carriage of greatness in a plain and open manner so it be without arrogancy  ... 
this part as we said in the beginning that the act of envy had somewhat in it of witchcraft so there is no other cure of envy but the cure of witchcraft and that is to remove the lot as they call it and to lay it upon another for  ... 
violent and undertaking natures who so they may have power and business will take it at any cost now to speak of public envy there is yet some good in public envy whereas in private there is none for public envy is as an ostracism that eclipseth men when they  ... 
state like to infection for as infection spreadeth upon that which is sound and tainteth it so when envy is gotten once into a state it traduceth even the best actions thereof and turneth them into an ill odor and therefore there is little won by intermingling of plausible actions  ... 
and estates themselves but this is a sure rule that if the envy upon the minister be great when the cause of it in him is small or if the envy be general in a manner upon all the ministers of an estate then the envy though hidden is truly  ... 
of other affections there is occasion given but now and then and therefore it was well said invidia festos dies non agit for it is ever working upon some or other and it is also noted that love and envy do make a man pine which other affections do not  ... 
subtilly and in the dark and to the prejudice of good things such as is the wheat 
Of Love
the stage is more beholding to love than the life of man for as to the stage love is ever matter of comedies and now and then of tragedies but in life it  ... 
great business do keep out this weak passion you must except nevertheless marcus antonius the half partner of the empire of rome and appius claudius the decemvir and lawgiver whereof the former was indeed a voluptuous man and inordinate but the latter was an austere and wise man and therefore  ... 
and all noble objects should do nothing but kneel before a little idol and make himself a subject though not of the mouth as beasts are yet of the eye which was given him for higher purposes it is a strange thing to note the excess of this passion and  ... 
intelligence is a man s self certainly the lover is more for there was never proud man thought so absurdly well of himself as the lover doth of the person loved and therefore it was well said that it is impossible to love and to be wise neither doth this  ... 
men ought to beware of this passion which loseth not only other things but itself as for the other losses the poet s relation doth well figure them that he that preferred helena quitted the gifts of juno and pallas for whosoever esteemeth too much of amorous affection quitteth both  ... 
who if they cannot but admit love yet make it keep quarters and sever it wholly from their serious affairs and actions of life for if it check once with business it troubleth men s fortunes and maketh men that they can no ways be true to their own ends  ... 
not spent upon some one or a few doth naturally spread itself towards many and maketh men become humane and charitable as it is seen sometime in friars nuptial love maketh mankind friendly love perfecteth it but wanton love corrupteth and embaseth it 
Of Great Place
men in great place are thrice servants  ... 
to lose power over a man s self the rising unto place is laborious and by pains men come to greater pains and it is sometimes base and by indignities men come to dignities the standing is slippery and the regress is either a downfall or at least an eclipse  ... 
sitting at their street door though thereby they offer age to scom certainly great persons had need to borrow other men s opinions to think themselves happy for if they judge by their own feeling they cannot find it but if they think with themselves what other men think of  ... 
great fortunes are strangers to themselves and while they are in the puzzle of business they have no time to tend their health either of body or mind illi mors gravis incubat qui notus nimis omnibus ignotus moritur sibi in place there is license to do good and evil whereof  ... 
they be put in act and that cannot be without power and place as the vantage and commanding ground merit and good works is the end of man s motion and conscience of the same is the accomplishment of man s rest for if a man can be partaker of  ... 
precepts and after a time set before thee thine own example and examine thyself strictly whether thou didst not best at first neglect not also the examples of those that have carried themselves ill in the same place not to set off thyself by taxing their memory but to direct  ... 
of both times of the ancient time what is best and of the latter time what is fittest seek to make thy course regular that men may know beforehand what they may expect but be not too positive and peremptory and express thyself well when thou digressest from thy rule  ... 
all embrace and invite helps and advices touching the execution of thy place and do not drive away such as bring thee information as meddlers but accept of them in good part the vices of authority are chiefly four delays corruption roughness and facility for delays give easy access keep  ... 
and with a manifest detestation of bribery doth the other and avoid not only the fault but the suspicion whosoever is found variable and changeth manifestly without manifest cause giveth suspicion of corruption therefore always when thou changest thine opinion or course profess it plainly and declare it together with  ... 
breedeth fear but roughness breedeth hate even reproofs from authority ought to be grave and not taunting as for facility it is worse than bribery for bribes come but now and then but if importunity or idle respects lead a man he shall never be without as solomon saith to  ... 
galba but of vespasian he saith solus imperantium vespasianus mutatus in melius though the one was meant of sufficiency the other of manners and affection it is an assured sign of a worthy and generous spirit whom honor amends for honor is or should be the place of virtue and  ... 
he is in the rising and to balance himself when he is placed use the memory of thy predecessor fairly and tenderly for if thou dost not it is a debt will sure be paid when thou art gone if thou have colleagues respect them and rather call them when 
Of Boldness
 ... 
is a trivial grammar school text but yet worthy a wise man s consideration question was asked of demosthenes what was the chief part of an orator he answered action what next action what next again action he said it that knew it best and had by nature himself no  ... 
all but the reason is plain there is in human nature generally more of the fool than of the wise and therefore those faculties by which the foolish part of men s minds is taken are most potent wonderful like is the case of boldness in civil business what first  ... 
with wise men at weak times therefore we see it hath done wonders in popular states but with senates and princes less and more ever upon the first entrance of bold persons into action than soon after for boldness is an ill keeper of promise surely as there are mountebanks  ... 
miracle mahomet made the people believe that he would call an hill to him and from the top of it offer up his prayers for the observers of his law the people assembled mahomet called the hill to come to him again and again and when the hill stood still  ... 
make a turn and no more ado certainly to men of great judgment bold persons are a sport to behold nay and to the vulgar also boldness has somewhat of the ridiculous for if absurdity be the subject of laughter doubt you not but great boldness is seldom without some  ... 
they stand at a stay like a stale at chess where it is no mate but yet the game cannot stir but this last were fitter for a satire than for a serious observation this is well to be weighed that boldness is ever blind for it seeth not danger  ... 
them except they be very great 
Of Goodness & Goodness of Nature
i take goodness in this sense the affecting of the weal of men which is that the grecians call philanthropia and the word humanity as it is used is a little too light to express it goodness i call the habit and goodness of  ... 
error the desire of power in excess caused the angels to fall the desire of knowledge in excess caused man to fall but in charity there is no excess neither can angel nor man come in dan ger by it the inclination to goodness is imprinted deeply in the nature  ... 
like to have been stoned for gagging in a waggishness a long billed fowl errors indeed in this virtue of goodness or charity may be committed the italians have an ungracious proverb tanto buon che val niente so good that he is good for nothing and one of the doctors  ... 
goodness as the christian religion doth therefore to avoid the scandal and the danger both it is good to take knowledge of the errors of an habit so excellent seek the good of other men but be not in bondage to their faces or fancies for that is but facility  ... 
just and unjust but he doth not rain wealth nor shine honor and virtues upon men equally common benefits are to be communicate with all but peculiar benefits with choice and beware how in making the portraiture thou breakest the pattern for divinity maketh the love of ourselves the pattern  ... 
as with great for otherwise in feeding the streams thou driest the fountain neither is there only a habit of goodness directed by right reason but there is in some men even in nature a disposition towards it as on the other side there is a natural malignity for there  ... 
as it were in season and are ever on the loading part not so good as the dogs that licked lazarus sores but like flies that are still buzzing upon any thing that is raw misanthropi that make it their practice to bring men to the bough and yet never  ... 
building houses that shall stand firm the parts and signs of goodness are many if a man be gracious and courteous to strangers it shows he is a citizen of the world and that his heart is no island cut off from other lands but a continent that joins to  ... 
shot if he be thankful for small benefits it shows that he weighs men s minds and not their trash but above all if he have st paul s perfection that he would wish to be anathema from christ for the salvation of his brethren it shows much of a 
Of Nobility
 ... 
for nobility attempers sovereignty and draws the eyes of the people somewhat aside from the line royal but for democracies they need it not and they are commonly more quiet and less subject to sedition than where there are stirps of nobles for men s eyes are upon the business  ... 
the low countries in their government excel for where there is an equality the consultations are more indifferent and the payments and tributes more cheerful a great and potent nobility addeth majesty to a monarch but diminisheth power and putteth life and spirit into the people but presseth their fortune  ... 
state for it is a surcharge of expense and besides it being of necessity that many of the nobility fall in time to be weak in fortune it maketh a kind of disproportion between honor and means as for nobility in particular persons it is a reverend thing to see  ... 
the act of time those that are first raised to nobility are commonly more virtuous but less innocent than their descendants for there is rarely any rising but by a commixture of good and evil arts but it is reason the memory of their virtues remain to their posterity and  ... 
the passive envy from others towards them because they are in possession of honor certainly kings that have able men of their nobility shall find ease in employing them and a better slide into their business for people naturally bend to them as born in some sort to command 
Of Seditions
and  ... 
in states ille etiam caecos instare tumultus saepe monet fraudesque et operta tunescere bella libels and licentious discourses against the state when they are frequent and open and in like sort false news often running up and down to the disadvantage of the state and hastily embraced are amongst the  ... 
howsoever he noteth it right that seditious tumults and seditious fames differ no more but as brother and sister masculine and feminine especially if it come to that that the best actions of a state and the most plausible and which ought to give greatest contentment are taken in ill  ... 
the despising of them many times checks them best and the going about to stop them doth but make a wonder long lived also that kind of obedience which tacitus speaketh of is to be held suspected erant in officio sed tamen qui mallent mandata imperantium interpretari quam exequi disputing  ... 
be common parents make themselves as a party and lean to a side it is as a boat that is overthrown by uneven weight on the one side as was well seen in the time of henry the third of france for first himself entered league for the extirpation of  ... 
when discords and quarrels and factions are carried openly and audaciously it is a sign the reverence of government is lost for the motions of the greatest persons in a government ought to be as the motions of the planets under primum mobile according to the old opinion which is  ... 
for reverence is that wherewith princes are girt from god who threateneth the dissolving thereof solvam cingula regum so when any of the four pillars of government are mainly shaken or weakened which are religion justice counsel and treasure men had need to pray for fair weather but let us  ... 
be considered for the surest way to prevent seditions if the times do bear it is to take away the matter of them for if there be fuel prepared it is hard to tell whence the spark shall come that shall set it on fire the matter of seditions is  ... 
is an assured and infallible sign of a state disposed to seditions and troubles and if this poverty and broken estate in the better sort be joined with a want and necessity in the mean people the danger is imminent and great for the rebellions of the belly are the  ... 
to be too reasonable who do often spurn at their own good nor yet by this whether the griefs whereupon they rise be in fact great or small for they are the most dangerous discontentments where the fear is greater than the feeling dolendi modus timendi non item besides in  ... 
true that every vapor or fume doth not turn into a storm so it is nevertheless true that storms though they blow over divers times yet may fall at last and as the spanish proverb noteth well the cord breaketh at the last by the weakest pull the causes and  ... 
general preservatives whereof we will speak as for the just cure it must answer to the particular disease and so be left to counsel rather than rule the first remedy or prevention is to remove by all means possible that material cause of sedition whereof we spake which is want  ... 
taxes and tributes and the like generally it is to be foreseen that the population of a kingdom especially if it be not mown down by wars do not exceed the stock of the kingdom which should maintain them neither is the population to be reckoned only by number for  ... 
and so doth likewise an overgrown clergy for they bring nothing to the stock and in like manner when more are bred scholars than preferments can take off it is likewise to be remembered that forasmuch as the increase of any estate must be upon the foreigner for whatsoever is  ... 
pass that materiam superabit opus that the work and carriage is more worth than the material and enricheth a state more as is notably seen in the low countrymen who have the best mines above ground in the world above all things good policy is to be used that the  ... 
devouring trades of usury ingrossing great pasturages and the like for removing discontentments or at least the danger of them there is in every state as we know two portions of subjects the noblesse and the commonalty when one of these is discontent the danger is not great for common  ... 
amongst the meaner that then they may declare themselves the poets feign that the rest of the gods would have bound jupiter which he hearing of by the counsel of pallas sent for briareus with his hundred hands to come in to his aid an emblem no doubt to show  ... 
bleed inwards endangereth malign ulcers and pernicious imposthumations the part of epimetheus mought well become prometheus in the case of discontentments for there is not a better provision against them epimetheus when griefs and evils flew abroad at last shut the lid and kept hope in the bottom of the  ... 
when it cannot by satisfaction and when it can handle things in such manner as no evil shall appear so peremptory but that it hath some outlet of hope which is the less hard to do because both particular persons and factions are apt enough to flatter themselves or at  ... 
hath greatness and reputation that hath confidence with the discontented party and upon whom they turn their eyes and that is thought discontented in his own particular which kind of persons are either to be won and reconciled to the state and that in a fast and true manner or  ... 
the worst remedies for it is a desperate case if those that hold with the proceeding of the state be full of discord and faction and those that are against it be entire and united i have noted that some witty and sharp speeches which have fallen from princes have  ... 
se militem non emi for it put the soldiers out of hope of the donative probus likewise by that speech si vixero non opus erit amplius romano imperio militibus a speech of great despair for the soldiers and many the like surely princes had need in tender matters and ticklish  ... 
some great person one or rather more of military valor near unto them for the repressing of seditions in their beginnings for without that there useth to be more trepidation in court upon the first breaking out of troubles than were fit and the state runneth the danger of that  ... 
worse than the disease 
Of Atheism
i had rather believe all the fables in the legend and the talmud and the alcoran than that this universal frame is without a mind and therefore god never wrought miracle to convince atheism because his ordinary works convince it it is true that a little  ... 
together it must needs fly to providence and deity nay even that school which is most accused of atheism doth most demonstrate religion that is the school of leucippus and democritus and epicurus for it is a thousand times more credible that four mutable elements and one immutable fifth essence  ... 
thought in his heart so as he rather saith it by rote to himself as that he would have than that he can thoroughly believe it or be persuaded of it for none deny there is a god but those for whom it maketh that there were no god it  ... 
nay more you shall have atheists strive to get disciples as it fareth with other sects and which is most of all you shall have of them that will suffer for atheism and not recant whereas if they did truly think that there were no such thing as god why  ... 
was no god but certainly he is traduced for his words are noble and divine non deos vulgi negare profanum sed vulgi opiniones diis applicare profanum plato could have said no more and although he had the confidence to deny the administration he had not the power to deny the  ... 
not the latitude and extent of it so that against atheists the very savages take part with the very subtlest philosophers the contemplative atheist is rare a diagoras a bion a lucian perhaps and some others and yet they seem to be more than they are for that all that  ... 
religion if they be many for any one main division addeth zeal to both sides but many divisions introduce atheism another is scandal of priests when it is come to that which st bernard saith non est jam dicere ut populus sic sacerdos quia nec sic populus ut sacerdos a  ... 
for certainly man is of kin to the beasts by his body and if he be not of kin to god by his spirit he is a base and ignoble creature it destroys likewise magnanimity and the raising of human nature for take an example of a dog and mark  ... 
man when he resteth and assureth himself upon divine protection and favor gathered a force and faith which human nature in itself could not obtain therefore as atheism is in all respects hateful so in this that it depriveth human nature of the means to exalt itself above human frailty  ... 
hoc ipso hujus gentis et terrae domestico nativoque sensu italos ipsos et latinos sed pietate ac religione atque hac una sapientia quod deorum immortalium numine omnia regi gubernarique perspeximus omnes gentes nationesque superavimus 
Of Superstition
it were better to have no opinion of god at all than such an opinion as is  ... 
they should say that there was one plutarch that would eat his children as soon as they were born as the poets speak of saturn and as the contumely is greater towards god so the danger is greater towards men atheism leaves a man to sense to philosophy to natural  ... 
further and we see the times inclined to atheism as the time of augustus caesar were civil times but superstition hath been the confusion of many states and bringeth in a new primum mobile that ravisheth all the spheres of government the master of superstition is the people and in  ... 
epicycles and such engines of orbs to save the phenomena though they knew there were no such things and in like manner that the schoolmen had framed a number of subtle and intricate axioms and theorems to save the practice of the church the causes of superstition are pleasing and  ... 
divine matters by human which cannot but breed mixture of imaginations and lastly barbarous times especially joined with calamities and disasters superstition without a veil is a deformed thing for as it addeth deformity to an ape to be so like a man so the similitude of superstition to religion  ... 
be had that as it fareth in ill purgings the good be not taken away with the bad which commonly is done when the people is the reformer 
Of Travel
travel in the younger sort is a part of education in the elder a part of experience he that travelleth into a  ... 
be able to tell them what things are worthy to be seen in the country where they go what acquaintances they are to seek what exercises or discipline the place yieldeth for else young men shall go hooded and look abroad little it is a strange thing that in sea  ... 
use the things to be seen and observed are the courts of princes especially when they give audience to ambassadors the courts of justice while they sit and hear causes and so of consistories ecclesiastic the churches and monasteries with the monuments which are therein extant the walls and fortifications  ... 
comedies such whereunto the better sort of persons do resort treasuries of jewels and robes cabinets and rarities and to conclude whatsoever is memorable in the places where they go after all which the tutors or servants ought to make diligent inquiry as for triumphs masks feasts weddings funerals capital  ... 
said he must have some entrance into the language before he goeth then he must have such a servant or tutor as knoweth the country as was likewise said let him carry with him also some card or book describing the country where he travelleth which will be a good  ... 
the town to another which is a great adamant of acquaintance let him sequester himself from the company of his countrymen and diet in such places where there is good company of the nation where he travelleth let him upon his removes from one place to another procure recommendation to  ... 
of all profitable is acquaintance with the secretaries and employed men of ambassadors for so in travelling in one country he shall suck the experience of many let him also see and visit eminent persons in all kinds which are of great name abroad that he may be able to  ... 
quarrels when a traveller returneth home let him not leave the countries where he hath travelled altogether behind him but maintain a correspondence by letters with those of his acquaintance which are of most worth and let his travel appear rather in his discourse than his apparel or gesture and  ... 
own country 
Of Empire
it is a miserable state of mind to have few things to desire and many things to fear and yet that commonly is the case of kings who being at the highest want matter of desire which makes their minds more languishing and have many representations of perils  ... 
maketh any man s heart hard to find or sound hence it comes likewise that princes many times make themselves desires and set their hearts upon toys sometimes upon a building sometimes upon erecting of an order sometimes upon the advancing of a person sometimes upon obtaining excellency in some  ... 
more cheered and refreshed by profiting in small things than by standing at a stay in great we see also that kings that have been fortunate conquerors in their first years it being not possible for them to go forward infinitely but that they must have some check or arrest  ... 
thing he was to speak now of the true temper of empire it is a thing rare and hard to keep for both temper and distemper consist of contraries but it is one thing to mingle contraries another to interchange them the answer of apollonius to vespasian is full of  ... 
the unequal and untimely interchange of power pressed too far and relaxed too much this is true that the wisdom of all these latter times in princes affairs is rather fine deliveries and shiftings of dangers and mischiefs when they are near than solid and grounded courses to keep them  ... 
difficulty is often in their own mind for it is common with princes saith tacitus to will contradictories sunt plerumque regum voluntates vehementes et inter se contrariae for it is the solecism of power to think to command the end and yet not to endure the mean kings have to  ... 
be given for occasions are so variable save one which ever holdeth which is that princes do keep due sentinel that none of their neighbors do ever grow so by increase of territory by embracing of trade by approaches or the like as they become more able to annoy them  ... 
three could win a palm of ground but the other two would straightways balance it either by confederation or if need were by a war and would not in any wise take up peace at interest and the like was done by that league which guicciardini saith was the security  ... 
is no question but a just fear of an imminent danger though there be no blow given is a lawful cause of a war for their wives there are cruel examples of them livia is infamed for the poisoning of her husband roxalana solyman s wife was the destruction of  ... 
their own children or else that they be advoutresses for their children the tragedies likewise of dangers from them have been many and generally the entering of fathers into suspicion of their children hath been ever unfortunate the destruction of mustapha that we named before was so fatal to solyman  ... 
like manner fatal to his house for both constantinus and constance his sons died violent deaths and constantius his other son did little better who died indeed of sickness but after that julianus had taken arms against him the destruction of demetrius son to philip the second of macedon turned  ... 
henry the second king of england for their prelates when they are proud and great there is also danger from them as it was in the times of anselmus and thomas becket archbishops of canterbury who with their croziers did almost try it with the king s sword and yet  ... 
or particular patrons but by the people for their nobles to keep them at a distance it is not amiss but to depress them may make a king more absolute but less safe and less able to perform any thing that he desires i have noted it in my history  ... 
was fain to do all things himself for their second nobles there is not much danger from them being a body dispersed they may sometimes discourse high but that doth little hurt besides they are a counterpoise to the higher nobility that they grow not too potent and lastly being  ... 
the king s revenue for that that he wins in the hundred he leeseth in the shire the particular rates being increased but the total bulk of trading rather decreased for their commons there is little danger from them except it be where they have great and potent heads or  ... 
but trainings of men and arming them in several places and under several commanders and without donatives are things of defence and no danger princes are like to heavenly bodies which cause good or evil times and which have much veneration but no rest all precepts concerning kings are in 
Of Counsel
 ... 
life their lands their goods their children their credit some particular affair but to such as they make their counsellors they commit the whole by how much the more they are obliged to all faith and integrity the wisest princes need not think it any diminution to their greatness or  ... 
the arguments of counsel they will be tossed upon the waves of fortune and be full of inconstancy doing and undoing like the reeling of a drunken man solomon s son found the force of counsel as his father saw the necessity of it for the beloved kingdom of god  ... 
both the incorporation and inseparable conjunction of counsel with kings and the wise and politic use of counsel by kings the one in that they say jupiter did marry metis which signifieth counsel whereby they intend that sovereignty is married to counsel the other in that which followeth which was  ... 
fable containeth a secret of empire how kings are to make use of their counsel of state that first they ought to refer matters unto them which is the first begetting or impregnation but when they are elaborate moulded and shaped in the womb of their counsel and grow ripe  ... 
because they come forth with prudence and power are resembled to pallas armed proceeded from themselves and not only from their authority but the more to add reputation to themselves from their head and device let us now speak of the inconveniences of counsel and of the remedies the inconveniences  ... 
that counsel than of him that is counselled for which inconveniences the doctrine of italy and practice of france in some kings times hath introduced cabinet counsels a remedy worse than the disease as to secrecy princes are not bound to communicate all matters with all counsellors but may extract  ... 
that maketh it his glory to tell will do more hurt than many that know it their duty to conceal it is true there be some affairs which require extreme secrecy which will hardly go beyond one or two persons besides the king neither are those counsels unprosperous for besides  ... 
ends as it was with king henry the seventh of england who in his great business imparted himself to none except it were to morton and fox for weakening of authority the fable showeth the remedy nay the majesty of kings is rather exalted than diminished when they are in  ... 
with an eye to themselves certainly non inveniet fidem super terram is meant of the nature of times and not of all particular persons there be that are in nature faithful and sincere and plain and direct not crafty and involved let princes above all draw to themselves such natures  ... 
know them principis est virtus maxima nosse suos and on the other side counsellors should not be too speculative into their sovereign s person the true composition of a counsellor is rather to be skilful in their master s business than in his nature for then he is like to  ... 
in consort men are more obnoxious to others humors therefore it is good to take both and of the inferior sort rather in private to preserve freedom of the greater rather in consort to preserve respect it is in vain for princes to take counsel concerning matters if they take  ... 
the person should be for the greatest errors are committed and the most judgment is shown in the choice of individuals it was truly said optimi consiliarii mortui books will speak plain when counsellors blanch therefore it is good to be conversant in them specially the books of such as  ... 
propounded one day and not spoken to till the next day in nocte consilium so was it done in the commission of union between england and scotland which was a grave and orderly assembly i commend set days for petitions for both it gives the sudtors more certainty for their  ... 
standing commissions as for trade for treasure for war for suits for some provinces for where there be divers particular counsels and but one counsel of estate as it is in spain they are in effect no more than standing commissions save that they have greater authority let such as  ... 
them a long table and a square table or seats about the walls seem things of form but are things of substance for at a long table a few at the upper end in effect sway all the business but in the other form there is more use of the 
Of Delays
 ... 
fortune is like the market where many times if you can stay a little the price will fall again it is sometimes like sibylla s offer which at first offereth the commodity at full then consumeth part and part and still holdeth up the price for occasion as it is  ... 
to time the beginnings and onsets of things dangers are no more light if they once seem light and more dangers have deceived men than forced them nay it were better to meet some dangers half way though they come nothing near than to keep too long a watch upon  ... 
or to teach dangers to come on by over early buckling towards them is another extreme the ripeness or unripeness of the occasion as we said must ever be well weighed and generally it is good to commit the beginnings of all great actions to argus with his hundred eyes  ... 
secrecy comparable to celerity like the motion of a bullet in the air which flieth so swift as it outruns the eye 
Of Cunning
we take cunning for a sinister or crooked wisdom and certainly there is a great difference between a cunning man and a wise man not only in point  ... 
many are perfect in men s humors that are not greatly capable of the real part of business which is the constitution of one that hath studied men more than books such men are fitter for practice than for counsel and they are good but in their own alley turn  ... 
to set forth their shop it is a point of cunning to wait upon him with whom you speak with your eye as the jesuits give it in precept for there be many wise men that have secret hearts and transparent countenances yet this would be done with a demure  ... 
counsellor and secretary that never came to queen elizabeth of england with bills to sign but he would always first put her into some discourse of estate that she mought the less mind the bills the like surprise may be made by moving things when the party is in haste  ... 
midst of that one was about to say as if he took himself up breeds a greater appetite in him with whom you confer to know more and because it works better when anything seemeth to be gotten from you by question than if you offer it of yourself you  ... 
in things that are tender and unpleasing it is good to break the ice by some whose words are of less weight and to reserve the more weighty voice to come in as by chance so that he may be asked the question upon the other s speech as narcissus  ... 
when he wrote a letter he would put that which was most material in the postscript as if it had been a by matter i knew another that when he came to have speech he would pass over that that he intended most and go forth and come back again  ... 
which they are not accustomed to the end they may be apposed of those things which of themselves they are desirous to utter it is a point of cunning to let fall those words in a man s own name which he would have another man learn and use and  ... 
a monarchy was a ticklish thing and that he did not affect it the other straight caught up those words and discoursed with divers of his friends that he had no reason to desire to be secretary in the declination of a monarchy the first man took hold of it  ... 
when that which a man says to another he lays it as if another had said it to him and to say truth it is not easy when such a matter passed between two to make it appear from which of them it first moved and began it is a  ... 
they would insinuate but they can wrap it into a tale which serveth both to keep themselves more in guard and to make others carry it with more pleasure it is a good point of cunning for a man to shape the answer he would have in his own words  ... 
is a thing of great patience but yet of much use a sudden bold and unexpected question doth many times surprise a man and lay him open like to him that having changed his name and walking in paul s another suddenly came behind him and called him by his  ... 
are that know the resorts and falls of business that cannot sink into the main of it like a house that hath convenient stairs and entries but never a fair room therefore you shall see them find out pretty looses in the conclusion but are no ways able to examine  ... 
suos stultus divertit ad dolos 
Of Wisdom Fo a Mans Self
an ant is a wise creature for itself but it is a shrewd thing in an orchard or garden and certainly men that are great lovers of themselves waste the public divide with reason between selflove and society and be so true to thyself as  ... 
another which they benefit the referring of all to a man s self is more tolerable in a sovereign prince because themselves are not only themselves but their good and evil is at the peril of the public fortune but it is a desperate evil in a servant to a  ... 
except they mean their service should be made but the accessory that which maketh the effect more pernicious is that all proportion is lost it were disproportion enough for the servant s good to be preferred before the master s but yet it is a greater extreme when a little  ... 
of their master s great and important affairs and for the most part the good such servants receive is after the model of their own fortune but the hurt they sell for that good is after the model of their master s fortune and certainly it is the nature of  ... 
of their affairs wisdom for a man s self is in many branches thereof a depraved thing it is the wisdom of rats that will be sure to leave a house somewhat before it fall it is the wisdom of the fox that thrusts out the badger who digged and  ... 
sacrificed to themselves they become in the end themselves sacrifices to the inconstancy of fortune whose wings they thought by their self wisdom to have pinioned 
Of Innovations
as the births of living creatures at first are illshapen so are all innovations which are the births of time yet notwithstanding as those  ... 
motion strongest at first surely every medicine is an innovation and he that will not apply new remedies must expect new evils for time is the greatest innovator and if time of course alter things to the worse and wisdom and counsel shall not alter them to the better what  ... 
by their utility yet they trouble by their inconformity besides they are like strangers more admired and less favored all this is true if time stood still which contrariwise moveth so round that a froward retention of custom is as turbulent a thing as an innovation and they that reverence  ... 
mends some and pairs others and he that is holpen takes it for a fortune and thanks the time and he that is hurt for a wrong and imputeth it to the author it is good also not to try experiments in states except the necessity be urgent or the  ... 
a stand upon the ancient way and then look about us and discover what is the straight and right way and so to walk in it 
Of Dispatch
affected dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business that can be it is like that which the physicians call predigestion or  ... 
so in business the keeping close to the matter and not taking of it too much at once procureth dispatch it is the care of some only to come off speedily for the time or to contrive some false periods of business because they may seem men of dispatch but  ... 
a little that we may make an end the sooner on the other side true dispatch is a rich thing for time is the measure of business as money is of wares and business is bought at a dear hand where there is small dispatch the spartans and spaniards have  ... 
interrupt them in the continuance of their speeches for he that is put out of his own order will go forward and backward and be more tedious while he waits upon his memory than he could have been if he had gone on in his own course but sometimes it  ... 
speeches are as fit for dispatch as a robe or mantle with a long train is for race prefaces and passages and excusations and other speeches of reference to the person are great wastes of time and though they seem to proceed of modesty they are bravery yet beware of  ... 
the distribution be not too subtle for he that doth not divide will never enter well into business and he that divideth too much will never come out of it clearly to choose time is to save time and an unseasonable motion is but beating the air there be three  ... 
for though it should be wholly rejected yet that negative is more pregnant of direction than an indefinite as ashes are more generative than dust 
Of Seeming Wise
it hath been an opinion that the french are wiser than they seem and the spaniards seem wiser than they are but howsoever it be  ... 
ridiculous thing and fit for a satire to persons of judgment to see what shifts these formalists have and what prospectives to make superficies to seem body that hath depth and bulk some are so close and reserved as they will not show their wares but by a dark light  ... 
cicero saith of piso that when he answered him he fetched one of his brows up to his forehead and bent the other down to his chin respondes altero ad frontem sublato altero ad mentum depresso supercilio crudelitatem tibi non placere some think to bear it by speaking a great  ... 
and commonly by amusing men with a subtilty blanch the matter of whom a gellius saith hominem delirum qui verborum minutiis rerum frangit pondera of which kind also plato in his protagoras bringeth in prodius in scorn and maketh him make a speech that consisteth of distinction from the beginning  ... 
of wisdom is the bane of business to conclude there is no decaying merchant or inward beggar hath so many tricks to uphold the credit of their wealth as these empty persons have to maintain the credit of their sufficiency seeming wise men may make shift to get opinion but 
Of Friendship
 ... 
solitude is either a wild beast or a god for it is most true that a natural and secret hatred and aversation towards society in any man hath somewhat of the savage beast but it is most untrue that it should have any character at all of the divine nature  ... 
the sicilian and apollonius of tyana and truly and really in divers of the ancient hermits and holy fathers of the church but little do men perceive what solitude is and how far it extendeth for a crowd is not company and faces are but a gallery of pictures and  ... 
further and affirm most truly that it is a mere and miserable solitude to want true friends without which the world is but a wilderness and even in this sense also of solitude whosoever in the frame of his nature and affections is unfit for friendship he taketh it of  ... 
not much otherwise in the mind you may take sarza to open the liver steel to open the spleen flowers of sulphur for the lungs castoreum for the brain but no receipt openeth the heart but a true friend to whom you may impart griefs joys fears hopes suspicions counsels  ... 
at the hazard of their own safety and greatness for princes in regard of the distance of their fortune from that of their subjects and servants cannot gather this fruit except to make themselves capable thereof they raise some persons to be as it were companions and almost equals to  ... 
the knot and we see plainly that this hath been done not by weak and passionate princes only but by the wisest and most politic that ever reigned who have oftentimes joined to themselves some of their servants whom both themselves have called friends and allowed other likewise to call  ... 
the pursuit of sylla and that sylla did a little resent thereat and began to speak great pompey turned upon him again and in effect bade him be quiet for that more men adored the sun rising than the sun setting with julius caesar decimus brutus had obtained that interest  ... 
of calpurnia this man lifted him gently by the arm out of his chair telling him he hoped he would not dismiss the senate till his wife had dreamt a better dream and it seemeth his favor was so great as antonius in a letter which is recited verbatim in  ... 
his daughter to agrippa or take away his life there was no third way he had made him so great with tiberius caesar sejanus had ascended to that height as they two were termed and reckoned as a pair of friends tiberius in a letter to him saith haec pro  ... 
and would often maintain plautianus in doing affronts to his son and did write also in a letter to the senate by these words i love the man so well as i wish he may over live me now if these princes had been as a trajan or a marcus  ... 
great as ever happened to mortal men but as an half piece except they mought have a friend to make it entire and yet which is more they were princes that had wives sons nephews and yet all these could not supply the comfort of friendship it is not to  ... 
perish his understanding surely comineus mought have made the same judgment also if it had pleased him of his second master lewis the eleventh whose closeness was indeed his tormentor the parable of pythagoras is dark but true cor ne edito eat not the heart certainly if a man would  ... 
effects for it redoubleth joys and cutteth griefs in halves for there is no man that imparteth his joys to his friend but he joyeth the more and no man that imparteth his griefs to his friend but he grieveth the less so that it is in truth of operation  ... 
this in the ordinary course of nature for in bodies union strengtheneth and cherisheth any natural action and on the other side weakeneth and dulleth any violent impression and even so it is of minds the second fruit of friendship is healthful and sovereign for the understanding as the first  ... 
before you come to that certain it is that whosoever hath his mind fraught with many thoughts his wits and understanding do clarify and break up in the communicating and discoursing with another he tosseth his thoughts more easily he marshalleth them more orderly he seeth how they look when  ... 
doth appear in figure whereas in thoughts they lie but as in packs neither is this second fruit of friendship in opening the understanding restrained only to such friends as are able to give a man counsel they indeed are best but even without that a man learneth of himself  ... 
friendship complete that other point which lieth more open and falleth within vulgar observation which is faithful counsel from a friend heraclitus saith well in one of his enigmas dry light is ever the best and certain it is that the light that a man receiveth by counsel from another  ... 
counsel of a friend and of a flatterer for there is no such flatterer as is a man s self and there is no such remedy against flattery of a man s self as the liberty of a friend counsel is of two sorts the one concerning manners the other  ... 
dead observing our faults in others is sometimes improper for our case but the best receipt best i say to work and best to take is the admonition of a friend it is a strange thing to behold what gross errors and extreme absurdities many especially of the greater sort  ... 
may think if he win that two eyes see no more than one or that a gamester seeth always more than a looker on or that a man in anger is as wise as he that hath said over the four and twenty letters or that a musket may be  ... 
but it shall be by pieces asking counsel in one business of one man and in another business of another man it is well that is to say better perhaps than if he asked none at all but he runneth two dangers one that he shall not be faithfully counselled  ... 
meaning and mixed partly of mischief and partly of remedy even as if you would call a physician that is thought good for the cure of the disease you complain of but is unacquainted with your body and therefore may put you in way for a present cure but overthroweth  ... 
distract and mislead than settle and direct after these two noble fruits of friendship peace in the affections and support of the judgment followeth the last fruit which is like the pomegranate full of many kernels i mean aid and bearing a part in all actions and occasions here the  ... 
that a friend is far more than himself men have their time and die many times in desire of some things which they principally take to heart the bestowing of a child the finishing of a work or the like if a man have a true friend he may rest  ... 
granted to him and his deputy for he may exercise them by his friend how many things are there which a man cannot with any face or comeliness say or do himself a man can scarce allege his own merits with modesty much less extol them a man cannot sometimes  ... 
his son but as a father to his wife but as a husband to his enemy but upon terms whereas a friend may speak as the case requires and not as it sorteth with the person but to enumerate these things were endless i have given the rule where a 
Of Expense
 ... 
man s country as for the kingdom of heaven but ordinary expense ought to be limited by a man s estate and governed with such regard as it be within his compass and not subject to deceit and abuse of servants and ordered to the best show that the bills  ... 
descend and look into their own estate some forbear it not upon negligence alone but doubting to bring themselves into melancholy in respect they shall find it broken but wounds cannot be cured without searching he that cannot look into his own estate at all had need both choose well  ... 
again in some other as if he be plentiful in diet to be saving in apparel if he be plentiful in the hall to be saving in the stable and the like for he that is plentiful in expenses of all kinds will hardly be preserved from decay in clearing  ... 
his custom but he that cleareth by degrees induceth a habit of frugality and gaineth as well upon his mind as upon his estate certainly who hath a state to repair may not despise small things and commonly it is less dishonorable to abridge petty charges than to stoop to 
Of the True Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates
 ... 
censure applied at large to others desired at a feast to touch a lute he said he could not fiddle but yet he could make a small town a great city these words holpen a little with a metaphor may express two differing abilities in those that deal in business  ... 
are so far from being able to make a small state great as their gift lieth the other way to bring a great and flourishing estate to ruin and decay and certainly whose degenerate arts and shifts whereby many counsellors and governors gain both favor with their masters and estimation  ... 
to manage affairs and to keep them from precipices and manifest inconveniences which nevertheless are far from the ability to raise and amplify an estate in power means and fortune but be the workmen what they may be let us speak of the work that is the true greatness of  ... 
counsels the greatness of an estate in bulk and territory doth fall under measure and the greatness of finances and revenue doth fall under computation the population may appear by musters and the number and greatness of cities and towns by cards and maps but yet there is not any  ... 
but hath in it a property and spirit hastily to get up and spread so are there states great in territory and yet not apt to enlarge or command and some that have but a small dimension of stem and yet apt to be the foundations of great monarchies walled  ... 
the people is of weak courage for as virgil saith it never troubles a wolf how many the sheep be the army of the persians in the plains of arbela was such a vast sea of people as it did somewhat astonish the commanders in alexander s army who came  ... 
thousand marching towards him he made himself merry with it and said yonder men are too many for an embassage and too few for a fight but before the sun set he found them enow to give him the chase with infinite slaughter many are the examples of the great  ... 
in base and effeminate people are failing for solon said well to croesus when in ostentation he showed him his gold sir if any other come that hath better iron than you he will be master of all this gold therefore let any prince or state think solely of his  ... 
that whatsoever estate or prince doth rest upon them he may spread his feathers for a time but he will mew them soon after the blessing of judah and issachar will never meet that the same people or nation should be both the lion s whelp and the ass between  ... 
degree in the subsidies of england for you must note that we speak now of the heart and not of the purse so that although the same tribute and tax laid by consent or by imposing be all one to the purse yet it works diversely upon the courage so  ... 
in effect but the gentleman s laborer even as you may see in coppice woods if you leave your staddles too thick you shall never have clean underwood but shrubs and bushes so in countries if the gentlemen be too many the commons will be base and you will bring  ... 
england and france whereof england though far less in territory and population hath been nevertheless an overmatch in regard the middle people of england make good soldiers which the peasants of france do not and herein the device of king henry the seventh whereof i have spoken largely in the  ... 
hands of the owners and not mere hirelings and thus indeed you shall attain to virgil s character which he gives to ancient italy terra potens armis atque ubere glebae neither is that state which for any thing i know is almost peculiar to england and hardly to be found  ... 
of noblemen and gentlemen received into custom doth much conduce unto martial greatness whereas contrariwise the close and reserved living of noblemen and gentlemen causeth a penury of military forces by all means it is to be procured that the trunk of nebuchadnezzar s tree of monarchy be great enough  ... 
people can with the greatest courage and policy in the world embrace too large extent of dominion it may hold for a time but it will fail suddenly the spartans were a nice people in point of naturalization whereby while they kept their compass they stood firm but when they  ... 
monarchy their manner was to grant naturalization which they called jus civitatis and to grant it in the highest degree that is not only jus commercii jus connubii jus haereditatis but also jus suffragii and jus honorum and this not to singular persons alone but likewise to whole families yea  ... 
world that spread upon the romans and that was the sure way of greatness i have marvelled sometimes at spain how they clasp and contain so large dominions with so few natural spaniards but sure the whole compass of spain is a very great body of a tree far above  ... 
seemeth at this instant they are sensible of this want of natives as by the pragmatical sanction now published appeareth it is certain that sedentary and within door arts and delicate manufactures that require rather the finger than the arm have in their nature a contrariety to a military disposition  ... 
use of slaves which commonly did rid those manufactures but that is abolished in greatest part by the christian law that which cometh nearest to it is to leave those arts chiefly to strangers which for that purpose are the more easily to be received and to contain the principal  ... 
honor study and occupation for the things which we formerly have spoken of are but habilitations towards arms and what is habilitation without intention and act romulus after his death as they report or feign sent a present to the romans that above all they should intend arms and then  ... 
time the turks have it at this day though in great declination of christian europe they that have it are in effect only the spaniards but it is so plain that every man profiteth in that he most intendeth that it needeth not to be stood upon it is enough  ... 
have done do wonders and those that have professed arms but for an age have notwithstanding commonly attained that greatness in that age which maintained them long after when their profession and exercise of arms hath grown to decay incident to this point is for a state to have those  ... 
the turk hath at hand for cause of war the propagation of his law or sect a quarrel that he may always command the romans though they esteemed the extending the limits of their empire to be great honor to their generals when it was done yet they never rested  ... 
and succors to their confederates as it ever was with the romans insomuch as if the confederate had leagues defensive with divers other states and upon invasion offered did implore their aids severally yet the romans would ever be the foremost and leave it to none other to have the  ... 
made wars to set up or pull down democracies and oligarchies or when wars were made by foreigners under the pretence of justice or protection to deliver the subjects of others from tyranny and oppression and the like let it suffice that no estate expect to be great that is  ... 
war is like the heat of exercise and serveth to keep the body in health for in a slothful peace both courages will effeminate and manners corrupt but howsoever it be for happiness without all question for greatness it maketh to be still for the most part in arms and  ... 
continually now by the space of six score years to be master of the sea is an abridgment of a monarchy cicero writing to atticus of pompey his preparation against caesar saith consilium pompeii plane themistocleum est putat enim qui mari potitur eum rerum potiri and without doubt pompey had  ... 
been final to the war but this is when princes or states have set up their rest upon the battles but thus much is certain that he that commands the sea is at great liberty and may take as much and as little of the war as he will whereas  ... 
are not merely inland but girt with the sea most part of their compass and because the wealth of both indies seems in great part but an accessory to the command of the seas the wars of latter ages seem to be made in the dark in respect of the  ... 
like things but in ancient times the trophies erected upon the place of the victory the funeral laudatives and monuments for those that died in the wars the crowns and garlands personal the style of emperor which the great kings of the world after borrowed the triumphs of the generals  ... 
it contained three things honor to the general riches to the treasury out of the spoils and donatives to the army but that honor perhaps were not fit for monarchies except it be in the person of the monarch himself or his sons as it came to pass in the  ... 
the scripture saith add a cubit to his stature in this little model of a man s body but in the great frame of kingdoms and commonwealths it is in the power of princes or estates to add amplitude and greatness to their kingdoms for by introducing such ordinances constitutions 
Of Regiment

Of Health
 ... 
and what he finds hurt of is the best physic to preserve health but it is a safer conclusion to say this agreeth not well with me therefore i will not continue it than this i find no offence of this therefore i may use it for strength of nature  ... 
it fit the rest to it for it is a secret both in nature and state that it is safer to change many things than one examine thy customs of diet sleep exercise apparel and the like and try in any thing thou shalt judge hurtful to discontinue it by  ... 
minded and cheerfully disposed at hours of meat and of sleep and of exercise is one of the best precepts of long lasting as for the passions and studies of the mind avoid envy anxious fears anger fretting inwards subtle and knotty inquisitions joys and exhilarations in excess sadness not  ... 
for your body when you shall need it if you make it too familiar it will work no extraordinary effect when sickness cometh i commend rather some diet for certain seasons than frequent use of physic except it be grown into a custom for those diets alter the body more  ... 
tendering celsus could never have spoken it as a physician had he not been a wise man withal when he giveth it for one of the great precepts of health and lasting that a man do vary and interchange contraries but with an inclination to the more benign extreme use  ... 
not the true cure of the disease and some other are so regular in proceeding according to art for the disease as they respect not sufficiently the condition of the patient take one of a middle temper or if it may not be found in one man combine two of 
Of Suspicion
 ... 
the mind they leese friends and they check with business whereby business cannot go on currently and constantly they dispose kings to tyranny husbands to jealousy wise men to irresolution and melancholy they are defects not in the heart but in the brain for they take place in the stoutest  ... 
they gain ground too fast there is nothing makes a man suspect much more than to know little and therefore men should remedy suspicion by procuring to know more and not to keep their suspicions in smother what would men have do they think those they employ and deal with  ... 
to make use of suspicions as to provide as if that should be true that he suspects yet it may do him no hurt suspicions that the mind of itself gathers are but buzzes but suspicions that are artificially nourished and put into men s heads by the tales and  ... 
shall make that party more circumspect not to give further cause of suspicion but this would not be done to men of base natures for they if they find themselves once suspected will never be true the italian says sospetto licentia fede as if suspicion did give a passport to 
Of Discourse
 ... 
should be thought some have certain common places and themes wherein they are good and want variety which kind of poverty is for the most part tedious and when it is once perceived ridiculous the honorablest part of talk is to give the occasion and again to moderate and pass  ... 
to tire and as we say now to jade any thing too far as for jest there be certain things which ought to be privileged from it namely religion matters of state great persons any man s present business of importance and any case that deserveth pity yet there be  ... 
hath a satirical vein as he maketh others afraid of his wit so he had need be afraid of others memory he that questioneth much shall learn much and content much but especially if he apply his questions to the skill of the persons whom he asketh for he shall  ... 
take up all the time let him find means to take them off and to bring others on as musicians use to do with those that dance too long galliards if you dissemble sometimes your knowledge of that you are thought to know you shall be thought another time to  ... 
commend himself with good grace and that is in commending virtue in another especially if it be such a virtue whereunto himself pretendeth speech of touch towards others should be sparingly used for discourse ought to be as a field without coming home to any man i knew two noblemen  ... 
would answer such and such a thing passed the lord would say i thought he would mar a good dinner discretion of speech is more than eloquence and to speak agreeably to him with whom we deal is more than to speak in good words or in good order a  ... 
the greyhound and the hare to use too many circumstances ere one come to the matter is wearisome to use none at all is blunt 
Of Plantations
plantations are amongst ancient primitive and heroical works when the world was young it begat more children but now it is old it begets fewer  ... 
like planting of woods for you must make account to leese almost twenty years profit and expect your recompense in the end for the principal thing that hath been the destruction of most plantations hath been the base and hasty drawing of profit in the first years it is true  ... 
but it spoileth the plantation for they will ever live like rogues and not fall to work but be lazy and do mischief and spend victuals and be quickly weary and then certify over to their country to the discredit of the plantation the people wherewith you plant ought to  ... 
make use of them then consider what victual or esculent things there are which grow speedily and within the year as parsnips carrots turnips onions radish artichokes of hierusalem maize and the like for wheat barley and oats they ask too much labor but with pease and beans you may  ... 
in the beginning till bread may be had for beasts or birds take chiefly such as are least subject to diseases and multiply fastest as swine goats cocks hens turkeys geese house doves and the like the victual in plantations ought to be expended almost as in a besieged town  ... 
own private consider likewise what commodities the soil where the plantation is doth naturally yield that they may some way help to defray the charge of the plantation so it be not as was said to the untimely prejudice of the main business as it hath fared with tobacco in  ... 
experience growing silk likewise if any be is a likely commodity pitch and tar where store of firs and pines are will not fail so drugs and sweet woods where they are cannot but yield great profit soap ashes likewise and other things that may be thought of but moil  ... 
above all let men make that profit of being in the wilderness as they have god always and his service before their eyes let not the government of the plantation depend upon too many counsellors and undertakers in the country that planteth but upon a temperate number and let those  ... 
some special cause of caution cram not in people by sending too fast company after company but rather harken how they waste and send supplies proportionably but so as the number may live well in the plantation and not by surcharge be in penury it hath been a great endangering  ... 
they have good store of salt with them that they may use it in their victuals when it shall be necessary if you plant where savages are do not only entertain them with trifles and gingles but use them justly and graciously with sufficient guard nevertheless and do not win  ... 
then it is time to plant with women as well as with men that the plantation may spread into generations and not be ever pieced from without it is the sinfullest thing in the world to forsake or destitute a plantation once in forwardness for besides the dishonor it is 
Of Riches
 ... 
and the care of it sometimes loseth or disturbeth the victory of great riches there is no real use except it be in the distribution the rest is but conceit so saith solomon where much is there are many to consume it and what hath the owner but the sight  ... 
prices are set upon little stones and rarities and what works of ostentation are undertaken because there might seem to be some use of great riches but then you will say they may be of use to buy men out of dangers or troubles as solomon saith riches are as  ... 
soberly distribute cheerfully and leave contentedly yet have no abstract nor friarly contempt of them but distinguish as cicero saith well of rabirius posthumus in studio rei amplificandae apparebat non avaritiae praedam sed instrumentum bonitati quaeri harken also to solomon and beware of hasty gathering of riches qui festinat ad  ... 
they come by the death of others as by the course of inheritance testaments and the like they come tumbling upon a man but it mought be applied likewise to pluto taking him for the devil for when riches come from the devil as by fraud and oppression and unjust  ... 
it is our great mother s blessing the earth s but it is slow and yet where men of great wealth do stoop to husbandry it multiplieth riches exceedingly i knew a nobleman in england that had the greatest audits of any man in my time a great grazier a  ... 
by one that himself came very hardly to a little riches and very easily to great riches for when a man s stock is come to that that he can expect the prime of markets and overcome those bargains which for their greatness are few men s money and be  ... 
when men shall wait upon others necessity broke by servants and instruments to draw them on put off others cunningly that would be better chapmen and the like practices which are crafty and naught as for the chopping of bargains when a man buys not to hold but to sell  ... 
vultus alieni and besides doth plough upon sundays but yet certain though it be it hath flaws for that the scriveners and brokers do value unsound men to serve their own turn the fortune in being the first in an invention or in a privilege doth cause sometimes a wonderful  ... 
to great riches and he that puts all upon adventures doth oftentimes break and come to poverty it is good therefore to guard adventures with certainties that may uphold losses monopolies and coemption of wares for re sale where they are not restrained are great means to enrich especially if  ... 
fishing for testaments and executorships as tacitus saith of seneca testamenta et orbos tamquam indagine capi it is yet worse by how much men submit themselves to meaner persons than in service believe not much them that seem to despise riches for they despise them that despair of them and  ... 
a great state left to an heir is as a lure to all the birds of prey round about to seize on him if he be not the better stablished in years and judgment likewise glorious gifts and foundations are like sacrifices without salt and but the painted sepulchres of 
Of Prophecies
 ... 
mean not to speak of divine prophecies nor of heathen oracles nor of natural predictions but only of prophecies that have been of certain memory and from hidden causes saith the pythonissa to saul to morrow thou and thy son shall be with me homer hath these verses at domus  ... 
prophecy of the discovery of america the daughter of polycrates dreamed that jupiter bathed her father and apollo anointed him and it came to pass that he was crucified in an open place where the sun made his body run with sweat and the rain washed it philip of macedon  ... 
tent said to him philippis iterum me videbis tiberius said to galba tu quoque galba degustabis imperium in vespasian s time there went a prophecy in the east that those that should come forth of judea should reign over the world which though it may be was meant of our  ... 
seventh when he was a lad and gave him water this is the lad that shall enjoy the crown for which we strive when i was in france i heard from one dr pena that the queen mother who was given to curious arts caused the king her husband s  ... 
of montgomery going in at his beaver the trivial prophecy which i heard when i was a child and queen elizabeth was in the flower of her years was when hempe is spun england s done whereby it was generally conceived that after the princes had reigned which had the  ... 
was also another prophecy before the year of 88 which i do not well understand there shall be seen upon a day between the baugh and the may the black fleet of norway when that that is come and gone england build houses of lime and stone for after wars  ... 
fleet being the greatest in strength though not in number of all that ever swam upon the sea as for cleon s dream i think it was a jest it was that he was devoured of a long dragon and it was expounded of a maker of sausages that troubled  ... 
the fireside though when i say despised i mean it as for belief for otherwise the spreading or publishing of them is in no sort to be despised for they have done much mischief and i see many severe laws made to suppress them that that hath given them grace  ... 
thinks it no peril to foretell that which indeed they do but collect as that of seneca s verse for so much was then subject to demonstration that the globe of the earth had great parts beyond the atlantic which mought be probably conceived not to be all sea and  ... 
contrived and feigned after the event past 
Of Ambition
ambition is like choler which is an humor that maketh men active earnest full of alacrity and stirring if it be not stopped but if it be stopped and cannot have his way it becometh adust and thereby malign and venomous so ambitious  ... 
which is the worst property in a servant of a prince or state therefore it is good for princes if they use ambitious men to handle it so as they be still progressive and not retrograde which because it cannot be without inconvenience it is good not to use such  ... 
they are of necessity good commanders in the wars must be taken be they never so ambitious for the use of their service dispenseth with the rest and to take a soldier without ambition is to pull off his spurs there is also great use of ambitious men in being  ... 
as tiberius used marco in the pulling down of sejanus since therefore they must be used in such cases there resteth to speak how they are to be bridled that they may be less dangerous there is less danger of them if they be of mean birth than if they  ... 
against ambitious great ones for when the way of pleasuring and displeasuring lieth by the favorite it is impossible any other should be overgreat another means to curb them is to balance them by others as proud as they but then there must be some middle counsellors to keep things  ... 
well but if they be stout and daring it may precipitate their designs and prove dangerous as for the pulling of them down if the affairs require it and that it may not be done with safety suddenly the only way is the interchange continually of favors and disgraces whereby  ... 
have an ambitious man stirring in business than great in dependences he that seeketh to be eminent amongst able men hath a great task but that is ever good for the public but he that plots to be the only figure amongst ciphers is the decay of a whole age  ... 
these intentions in another that aspireth is a wise prince generally let princes and states choose such ministers as are more sensible of duty than of using and such as love business rather upon conscience than upon bravery and let them discern a busy nature from a willing mind 
Of Masques
and  ... 
be in quire placed aloft and accompanied with some broken music and the ditty fitted to the device acting in song especially in dialogues hath an extreme good grace i say acting not dancing for that is a mean and vulgar thing and the voices of the dialogue would be  ... 
be noted that those things which i here set down are such as do naturally take the sense and not respect petty wonderments it is true the alterations of scenes so it be quietly and without noise are things of great beauty and pleasure for they feed and relieve the  ... 
strangely and makes it with great pleasure to desire to see that it cannot perfectly discern let the songs be loud and cheerful and not chirpings or pulings let the music likewise be sharp and loud and well placed the colors that show best by candle light are white carnation  ... 
vizors are off not after examples of known attires turke soldiers mariners and the like let anti masques not be long they have been commonly of fools satyrs baboons wild men antics beasts sprites witches ethiops pigmies turquets nymphs rustics cupids statuas moving and the like as for angels it  ... 
in such a company as there is steam and heat things of great pleasure and refreshment double masques one of men another of ladies addeth state and variety but all is nothing except the room be kept clear and neat for justs and tourneys and barriers the glories of them  ... 
but enough of these toys 
Of Nature
in men nature is often hidden sometimes overcome seldom extinguished force maketh nature more violent in the return doctrine and discourse maketh nature less importune but custom only doth alter and subdue nature he that seeketh victory over his nature let him not set himself  ... 
him practise with disadvantages as dancers do with thick shoes for it breeds great perfection if the practice be harder than the use where nature is mighty and therefore the victory hard the degrees had need be first to stay and arrest nature in time like to him that would  ... 
himself at once that is the best optimus ille animi vindex laedentia pectus vincula qui rupit dedoluitque semel neither is the ancient rule amiss to bend nature as a wand to a contrary extreme whereby to set it right understanding it where the contrary extreme is no vice let not  ... 
both and there is no means to help this but by seasonable intermissions but let not a man trust his victory over his nature too far for nature will lay buried a great time and yet revive upon the occasion or temptation like as it was with aesop s damsel  ... 
best perceived in privateness for there is no affectation in passion for that putteth a man out of his precepts and in a new case or experiment for there custom leaveth him they are happy men whose natures sort with their vocations otherwise they may say multum incola fuit anima  ... 
so as the spaces of other business or studies will suffice a man s nature runs either to herbs or weeds therefore let him seasonably water the one and destroy the other 
Of Custom
and education men s thoughts are much according to their inclination their discourse and speeches according to their  ... 
that for the achieving of a desperate conspiracy a man should not rest upon the fierceness of any man s nature or his resolute undertakings but take such an one as hath had his hands formerly in blood but machiavel knew not of a friar clement nor a ravillac nor  ... 
to custom even in matter of blood in other things the predominancy of custom is everywhere visible insomuch as a man would wonder to hear men profess protest engage give great words and then do just as they have done before as if they were dead images and engines moved  ... 
the corpses of their husbands the lads of sparta of ancient time were wont to be scourged upon the altar of diana without so much as queching i remember in the beginning of queen elizabeth s time of england an irish rebel condemned put up a petition to the deputy  ... 
be put of the force of custom both upon mind and body therefore since custom is the principal magistrate of man s life let men by all means endeavor to obtain good customs certainly custom is most perfect when it beginneth in young years this we call education which is  ... 
except it be in some minds that have not suffered themselves to fix but have kept themselves open and prepared to receive continual amendment which is exceeding rare but if the force of custom simple and separate be great the force of custom copulate and conjoined and collegiate is far  ... 
do not much mend the deeds but the misery is that the most effectual means are now applied to the ends least to be desired 
Of Fortune
it cannot be denied but outward accidents conduce much to fortune favor opportunity death of others occasion fitting virtue but chiefly the mould of a  ... 
draco overt and apparent virtues bring forth praise but there be secret and hidden virtues that bring forth fortune certain deliveries of a man s self which have no name the spanish name desemboltura partly expresseth them when there be not stonds nor restiveness in a man s nature but  ... 
versatile ingenium therefore if a man look sharply and attentively he shall see fortune for though she be blind yet she is not invisible the way of fortune is like the milken way in the sky which is a meeting or knot of a number of small stars not seen  ... 
in into his other conditions that he hath poco di matto and certainly there be not two more fortunate properties than to have a little of the fool and not too much of the honest therefore extreme lovers of their country or masters were never fortunate neither can they be  ... 
for her daughters confidence and reputation for those two felicity breedeth the first within a man s self the latter in others towards him all wise men to decline the envy of their own virtues use to ascribe them to providence and fortune for so they may the better assume  ... 
ascribe openly too much to their own wisdom and policy end infortunate it is written that timotheus the athenian after he had in the account he gave to the state of his government often interlaced this speech and in this fortune had no part never prospered in anything he undertook  ... 
a man s self 
Of Usury
many have made witty invectives against usury they say that it is a pity the devil should have god s part which is the tithe that the usurer is the greatest sabbath breaker because his plough goeth every sunday that the usurer is the drone that  ... 
it is against nature for money to beget money and the like i say this only that usury is a concessum propter duritiem cordis for since there must be borrowing and lending and men are so hard of heart as they will not lend freely usury must be permitted some  ... 
to provide that while we make forth to that which is better we meet not with that which is worse the discommodities of usury are first that it makes fewer merchants for were it not for this lazy trade of usury money would not he still but would in great  ... 
sit at great usury the third is incident to the other two and that is the decay of customs of kings or states which ebb or flow with merchandizing the fourth that it bringeth the treasure of a realm or state into a few hands for the usurer being at  ... 
or purchasing and usury waylays both the sixth that it doth dull and damp all industries improvements and new inventions wherein money would be stirring if it were not for this slug the last that it is the canker and ruin of many men s estates which in process of  ... 
as if the usurer either call in or keep back his money there will ensue presently a great stand of trade the second is that were it not for this easy borrowing upon interest men s necessities would draw upon them a most sudden undoing in that they would be  ... 
if they do they will look precisely for the forfeiture i remember a cruel moneyed man in the country that would say the devil take this usury it keeps us from forfeitures of mortgages and bonds the third and last is that it is a vanity to conceive that there  ... 
must be sent to utopia to speak now of the reformation and reiglement of usury how the discommodities of it may be best avoided and the commodities retained it appears by the balance of commodities and discommodities of usury two things are to be reconciled the one that the tooth  ... 
a greater for if you reduce usury to one low rate it will ease the common borrower but the merchant will be to seek for money and it is to be noted that the trade of merchandize being the most lucrative may bear usury at a good rate other contracts  ... 
in the hundred and let that rate be proclaimed to be free and current and let the state shut itself out to take any penalty for the same this will preserve borrowing from any general stop or dryness this will ease infinite borrowers in the country this will in good  ... 
than take five in the hundred especially having been used to greater profit secondly let there be certain persons licensed to lend to known merchants upon usury at a higher rate and let it be with the cautions following let the rate be even with the merchant himself somewhat more  ... 
they will hardly be brooked in regard of certain suspicions let the state be answered some small matter for the license and the rest left to the lender for if the abatement be but small it will no whit discourage the lender for he for example that took before ten  ... 
will be hardly able to color other men s moneys in the country so as the license of nine will not suck away the current rate of five for no man will send his moneys far off nor put them into unknown hands if it be objected that this doth 
Of Youth
 ... 
lost no time but that happeneth rarely generally youth is like the first cogitations not so wise as the second for there is a youth in thoughts as well as in ages and yet the invention of young men is more lively than that of old and imaginations stream into  ... 
is said juventutem egit erroribus imo furoribus plenam and yet he was the ablest emperor almost of all the list but reposed natures may do well in youth as it is seen in augustus caesar cosmus duke of florence gaston de foix and others on the other side heat and  ... 
in new things abuseth them the errors of young men are the ruin of business but the errors of aged men amount but to this that more might have been done or sooner young men in the conduct and manage of actions embrace more than they can hold stir more  ... 
like an unready horse that will neither stop nor turn men of age object too much consult too long adventure too little repent too soon and seldom drive business home to the full period but content themselves with a mediocrity of success certainly it is good to compound employments of  ... 
and popularity youth but for the moral part perhaps youth will have the pre eminence as age hath for the politic a certain rabbin upon the text your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams inferreth that young men are admitted nearer to god than  ... 
ripeness in their years which fadeth betimes these are first such as have brittle wits the edge whereof is soon turned such as was hermogenes the rhetorician whose books are exceeding subtle who afterwards waxed stupid a second sort is of those that have some natural dispositions which have better  ... 
tract of years can uphold as was scipio africanus of whom livy saith in effect ultima primis cedebant 
Of Beauty
virtue is like a rich stone best plain set and surely virtue is best in a body that is comely though not of delicate features and that hath rather dignity of presence  ... 
this holds not always for augustus caesar titus vespasianus philip le belle of france edward the fourth of england alcibiades of athens ismael the sophy of persia were all high and great spirits and yet the most beautiful men of their times in beauty that of favor is more than  ... 
cannot tell whether apelles or albert durer were the more trifler whereof the one would make a personage by geometrical proportions the other by taking the best parts out of divers faces to make one excellent such personages i think would please nobody but the painter that made them not  ... 
you shall find never a good and yet altogether do well if it be true that the principal part of beauty is in decent motion certainly it is no marvel though persons in years seem many times more amiable pulchrorum autumnus pulcher for no youth can be comely but by  ... 
it maketh virtue shine and vices blush 
Of Deformity
deformed persons are commonly even with nature for as nature hath done ill by them so do they by nature being for the most part as the scripture saith void of natural affection and so they have their revenge of nature certainly there  ... 
body the stars of natural inclination are sometimes obscured by the sun of discipline and virtue therefore it is good to consider of deformity not as a sign which is more deceivable but as a cause which seldom faileth of the effect whosoever hath anything fixed in his person that  ... 
and especially of this kind to watch and observe the weakness of others that they may have somewhat to repay again in their superiors it quencheth jealousy towards them as persons that they think they may at pleasure despise and it layeth their competitors and emulators asleep as never believing  ... 
are envious towards all are more obnoxious and officious towards one but yet their trust towards them hath rather been as to good spials and good wbisperers than good magistrates and officers and much like is the reason of deformed persons still the ground is they will if they be  ... 
others 
Of Building
houses are built to live in and not to look on therefore let use be preferred before uniformity except where both may be had leave the goodly fabrics of houses for beauty only to the enchanted palaces of the poets who build them with small cost he that builds  ... 
about it whereby the heat of the sun is pent in and the wind gathereth as in troughs so as you shall have and that suddenly as great diversity of heat and cold as if you dwelt in several places neither is it ill air only that maketh an ill  ... 
at some near distance for sports of hunting hawking and races too near the sea too remote having the commodity of navigable rivers or the discommodity of their overflowing too far off from great cities which may hinder business or too near them which lurcheth all provisions and maketh everything  ... 
several dwellings that he sort them so that what he wanteth in the one he may find in the other lucullus answered pompey well who when he saw his stately galleries and rooms so large and lightsome in one of his houses said surely an excellent place for summer but  ... 
de oratore and a book he entitles orator whereof the former delivers the precepts of the art and the latter the perfection we will therefore describe a princely palace making a brief model thereof for it is strange to see now in europe such huge buildings as the vatican and  ... 
household the one for feasts and triumphs and the other for dwelling i understand both these sides to be not only returns but parts of the front and to be uniform without though severally partitioned within and to be on both sides of a great and stately tower in the  ... 
triumphs on the other side which is the household side i wish it divided at the first into a hall and a chapel with a partition between both of good state and bigness and those not to go all the length but to have at the further end a winter  ... 
a goodly leads upon the top railed with statuas interposed and the same tower to be divided into rooms as shall be thought fit the stairs likewise to the upper rooms let them be upon a fair open newel and finely railed in with images of wood cast into a  ... 
as in a tunnel and so much for the front only i understand the height of the first stairs to be sixteen foot which is the height of the lower room beyond this front is there to be a fair court but three sides of it of a far lower  ... 
the court not be paved for that striketh up a great heat in summer and much cold in winter but only some side alleys with a cross and the quarters to graze being kept shorn but not too near shorn the row of return on the banquet side let it  ... 
be a double house without thorough lights on the sides that you may have rooms from the sun both for forenoon and afternoon cast it also that you may have rooms both for summer and winter shady for summer and warm for winter you shall have sometimes fair houses so  ... 
besides they keep both the wind and sun off for that which would strike almost through the room doth scarce pass the window but let them be but few four in the court on the sides only beyond this court let there be an inward court of the same square  ... 
shade or estivation and only have opening and windows towards the garden and be level upon the floor no whit sunken under ground to avoid all dampishness and let there be a fountain or some fair work of statuas in the midst of this court and to be paved as  ... 
to it this upon the second story upon the ground story a fair gallery open upon pillars and upon the third story likewise an open gallery upon pillars to take the prospect and freshness of the garden at both corners of the further side by way of return let there  ... 
in divers places from the wall with some fine avoidances and thus much for the model of the palace save that you must have before you come to the front three courts a green court plain with a wall about it a second court of the same but more garnished  ... 
with pillars and not with arches below as for offices let them stand at distance with some low galleries to pass from them to the palace itself 
Of Gardens
g0d almighty first planted a garden and indeed it is the purest of human pleasures it is the greatest refreshment to the spirits  ... 
of gardens there ought to be gardens for all the months in the year in which severally things of beauty may be then in season for december and january and the latter part of november you must take such things as are green all winter holly ivy bays juniper cypress  ... 
vernus both the yellow and the grey primroses anemones the early tulippa hyacinthus orientalis chamairis fritellaria for march there come violets specially the single blue which are the earliest the yellow daffodil the daisy the almond tree in blossom the peach tree in blossom the cornelian tree in blossom sweet  ... 
leaf the lilac tree in may and june come pinks of all sorts specially the blushpink roses of all kinds except the musk which comes later honeysuckles strawberries bugloss columbine the french marigold flos africanus cherry tree in fruit ribes figs in fruit rasps vineflowers lavender in flowers the sweet  ... 
melons monks hoods of all colors in september come grapes apples poppies of all colors peaches melocotones nectarines cornelians wardens quinces in october and the beginning of november come services medlars bullaces roses cut or removed to come late hollyhocks and such like these particulars are for the climate of  ... 
than to know what be the flowers and plants that do best perfume the air roses damask and red are fast flowers of their smells so that you may walk by a whole row of them and find nothing of their sweetness yea though it be in a morning s  ... 
that is the musk rose then the strawberry leaves dying which yield a most excellent cordial smell then the flower of vines it is a little dust like the dust of a bent which grows upon the cluster in the first coming forth then sweet briar then wall flowers which  ... 
but those which perfume the air most delightfully not passed by as the rest but being trodden upon and crushed are three that is burnet wildthyme and watermints therefore you are to set whole alleys of them to have the pleasure when you walk or tread for gardens speaking of  ... 
besides alleys on both sides and i like well that four acres of ground be assigned to the green six to the heath four and four to either side and twelve to the main garden the green hath two pleasures the one because nothing is more pleasant to the eye  ... 
or day you ought not to buy the shade in the garden by going in the sun through the green therefore you are of either side the green to plant a covert alley upon carpenter s work about twelve foot in height by which you may go in shade into  ... 
be square encompassed on all the four sides with a stately arched hedge the arches to be upon pillars of carpenter s work of some ten foot high and six foot broad and the spaces between of the same dimension with the breadth of the arch over the arches let  ... 
plates of round colored glass gilt for the sun to play upon but this hedge i intend to be raised upon a bank not steep but gently slope of some six foot set all with flowers also i understand that this square of the garden should not be the whole  ... 
letting your prospect upon this fair hedge from the green nor at the further end for letting your prospect from the hedge through the arches upon the heath for the ordering of the ground within the great hedge i leave it to variety of device advising nevertheless that whatsoever form  ... 
some places fair columns upon frames of carpenter s work i would also have the alleys spacious and fair you may have closer alleys upon the side grounds but none in the main garden i wish also in the very middle a fair mount with three ascents and alleys enough  ... 
refreshment but pools mar all and make the garden unwholesome and full of flies and frogs fountains i intend to be of two natures the one that sprinkleth or spouteth water the other a fair receipt of water of some thirty or forty foot square but without fish or slime  ... 
or red or the like or gather any mossiness or putrefaction besides that it is to be cleansed every day by the hand also some steps up to it and some fine pavement about it doth well as for the other kind of fountain which we may call a bathing  ... 
is the same which we mentioned in the former kind of fountain which is that the water be in perpetual motion fed by a water higher than the pool and delivered into it by fair spouts and then discharged away under ground by some equality of bores that it stay  ... 
wish it to be framed as much as may be to a natural wildness trees i would have none in it but some thickets made only of sweet briar and honeysuckle and some wild vine amongst and the ground set with violets strawberries and primroses for these are sweet and  ... 
a good flower to the eye some with periwinkle some with violets some with strawberries some with cowslips some with daisies some with red roses some with lilium convallium some with sweet williams red some with bear s foot and the like low flowers being withal sweet and sightly part  ... 
be kept with cutting that they grow not out of course for the side grounds you are to fill them with variety of alleys private to give a full shade some of them wheresoever the sun be you are to frame some of them likewise for shelter that when the  ... 
set fruit trees of all sorts as well upon the walls as in ranges and this would be generally observed that the borders wherein you plant your fruit trees be fair and large and low and not steep and set with fine flowers but thin and sparingly lest they deceive  ... 
both sides with fruit trees and some pretty tufts of fruittrees and arbors with seats set in some decent order but these to be by no means set too thick but to leave the main garden so as it be not close but the air open and free for as  ... 
of summer for the morning and the evening or overcast days for aviaries i like them not except they be of that largeness as they may be turfed and have living plants and bushes set in them that the birds may have more scope and natural nesting and that no  ... 
for the most part taking advice with workmen with no less cost set their things together and sometimes add statuas and such things for state and magnificence but nothing to the true pleasure of a garden 
Of Negotiating
it is generally better to deal by speech than by letter and by the  ... 
heard by pieces to deal in person is good when a man s face breedeth regard as commonly with inferiors or in tender cases where a man s eye upon the countenance of him with whom he speaketh may give him a direction how far to go and generally where  ... 
cunning to contrive out of other men s business somewhat to grace themselves and will help the matter in report for satisfaction s sake use also such persons as affect the business wherein they are employed for that quickeneth much and such as are fit for the matter as bold  ... 
will strive to maintain their prescription it is better to sound a person with whom one deals afar off than to fall upon the point at first except you mean to surprise him by some short question it is better dealing with men in appetite than with those that are  ... 
still need him in some other thing or else that he be counted the honester man all practice is to discover or to work men discover themselves in trust in passion at unawares and of necessity when they would have somewhat done and cannot find an apt pretext if you  ... 
ever consider their ends to interpret their speeches and it is good to say little to them and that which they least look for in all negotiations of difficulty a man may not look to sow and reap at once but must prepare business and so ripen it by degrees 
Of Followers and Friends
 ... 
recommendation and protection from wrongs factious followers are worse to be liked which follow not upon affection to him with whom they range themselves but upon discontentment conceived against some other whereupon commonly ensueth that ill intelligence that we many times see between great personages likewise glorious followers who make  ... 
inquire the secrets of the house and bear tales of them to others yet such men many times are in great favor for they are officious and commonly exchange tales the following by certain estates of men answerable to that which a great person himself professeth as of soldiers to  ... 
and desert in all sorts of persons and yet where there is no eminent odds in sufficiency it is better to take with the more passable than with the more able and besides to speak truth in base times active men are of more use than virtuous it is true  ... 
the persons preferred more thankful and the rest more officious because all is of favor it is good discretion not to make too much of any man at the first because one cannot hold out that proportion to be governed as we call it by one is not safe for  ... 
it makes men to be of the last impression and full of change to take advice of some few friends is ever honorable for lookers on many times see more than gamesters and the vale best discovereth the hill there is little friendship in the world and least of all 
Of Suitors
 ... 
only corrupt minds but crafty minds that intend not performance some embrace suits which never mean to deal effectually in them but if they see there may be life in the matter by some other mean they will be content to win a thank or take a second reward or  ... 
served or generally to make other men s business a kind of entertainment to bring in their own nay some undertake suits with a full purpose to let them fall to the end to gratify the adverse party or competitor surely there is in some sort a right in every  ... 
it if affection lead a man to favor the less worthy in desert let him do it without depraving or disabling the better deserver in suits which a man doth not well understand it is good to refer them to some friend of trust and judgment that may report whether  ... 
no more thanks than one hath deserved is grown not only honorable but also gracious in suits of favor the first coming ought to take little place so far forth consideration may be had of his trust that if intelligence of the matter could not otherwise have been had but  ... 
secrecy in suits is a great mean of obtaining for voicing them to be in forwardness may discourage some kind of suitors but doth quicken and awake others but timing of the suit is the principal timing i say not only in respect of the person that should grant it  ... 
to the first grant if a man show himself neither dejected nor discontented iniquum petas ut aequum feras is a good rule where a man hath strength of favor but otherwise a man were better rise in his suit for he that would have ventured at first to have lost  ... 
no worse instruments than these general contrivers of suits for they are but a kind of poison and infection to public proceedings 
Of Studies
studies serve for delight for ornament and for ability their chief use for delight is in privateness and retiring for ornament is in discourse and for ability is  ... 
too much for ornament is affectation to make judgment wholly by their rules is the humor of a scholar they perfect nature and are perfected by experience for natural abilities are like natural plants that need proyning by study and studies themselves do give forth directions too much at large  ... 
take for granted nor to find talk and discourse but to weigh and consider some books are to be tasted others to be swallowed and some few to be chewed and digested that is some books are to be read only in parts others to be read but not curiously  ... 
waters flashy things reading maketh a full man conference a ready man and writing an exact man and therefore if a man write little he had need have a great memory if he confer little he had need have a present wit and if he read little he had need  ... 
by fit studies like as diseases of the body may have appropriate exercises bowling is good for the stone and reins shooting for the lungs and breast gentle walking for the stomach riding for the head and the like so if a man s wit be wandering let him study  ... 
call up one thing to prove and illustrate another let him study 197 the lawyers cases so every defect of the mind may have a special receipt 
Of Faction
many have an opinion not wise that for a prince to govern his estate or for a great person to govern his proceedings  ... 
that the considerations of factions is to be neglected mean men in their rising must adhere but great men that have strength in themselves were better to maintain themselves indifferent and neutral yet even in beginners to adhere so moderately as he be a man of the one faction which  ... 
subdivideth as the faction between lucullus and the rest of the nobles of the senate which they called optimates held out awhile against the faction of pompey and caesar but when the senate s authority was pulled down caesar and pompey soon after brake the faction or party of antonius  ... 
many times when the faction subdivideth prove principals but many times also they prove ciphers and cashiered for many a man s strength is in opposition and when that faileth he groweth out of use it is commonly seen that men once placed take in with the contrary faction to  ... 
the thanks the even carriage between two factions proceedeth not always of moderation but of a trueness to a man s self with end to make use of both certainly in italy they hold it a little suspect in popes when they have often in their mouth padre commune and  ... 
an obligation paramount to obligation of sovereignty and make the king tanquam unus ex nobis as was to be seen in the league of france when factions are carried too high and too violently it is a sign of weakness in princes and much to the prejudice both of their 
Of Ceremonies and Respects
 ... 
exceeding great parts of virtue as the stone had need to be rich that is set without foil but if a man mark it well it is in praise and commendation of men as it is in gettings and gains for the proverb is true that light gains make heavy  ... 
man s reputation and is as queen isabella said like perpetual letters commendatory to have good forms to attain them it almost sufficeth not to despise them for so shall a man observe them in others and let him trust himself with the rest for if he labor too much  ... 
is to teach others not to use them again and so diminisheth respect to himself especially they be not to be omitted to strangers and formal natures but the dwelling upon them and exalting them above the moon is not only tedious but doth diminish the faith and credit of  ... 
keep state amongst a man s inferiors one shall be sure of reverence and therefore it is good a little to be familiar he that is too much in anything so that he giveth another occasion of satiety maketh himself cheap to apply one s self to others is good  ... 
his motion let it be with condition if you allow his counsel let it be with alleging further reason men had need beware how they be too perfect in compliments for be they never so sufficient otherwise their enviers will be sure to give them that attribute to the disadvantage  ... 
more opportunities than he finds men s behavior should be like their apparel not too strait or point device but free for exercise or motion 
Of Praise
praise is the reflection of virtue but it is as the glass or body which giveth the reflection if it be from the common people  ... 
all but shows and species virtutibus similes serve best with them certainly fame is like a river that beareth up things light and swoln and drowns things weighty and solid but if persons of quality and judgment concur then it is as the scripture saith nomen bonum instar unguenti fragrantis  ... 
ordinary flatterer he will have certain common attributes which may serve every man if he be a cunning flatterer he will follow the archflatterer which is a man s self and wherein a man thinketh best of himself therein the flatterer will uphold him most but if he be an  ... 
and great persons laudando praecipere when by telling men what they are they represent to them what they should be some men are praised maliciously to their hurt thereby to stir envy and jealousy towards them pessimum genus inimicorum laudantium insomuch as it was a proverb amongst the grecians that  ... 
praiseth his friend aloud rising early it shall be to him no better than a curse too much magnifying of man or matter doth irritate contradiction and procure envy and scorn to praise a man s self cannot be decent except it be in rare cases but to praise a  ... 
and other employments sbirrerie which is under sheriffries as if they were but matters for under sheriffs and catchpoles though many times those under sheriffries do more good than their high speculations st paul when he boasts of himself he doth oft interlace i speak like a fool but speaking 
Of Vain-glory
 ... 
have never so little hand in it they think it is they that carry it they that are glorious must needs be factious for all bravery stands upon comparisons they must needs be violent to make good their own vaunts neither can they be secret and therefore not effectual but  ... 
noteth in the case of antiochus and the aetolians there are sometimes great effects of cross lies as if a man that negotiates between two princes to draw them to join in a war against the third doth extol the forces of either of them above measure the one to  ... 
and opinion brings on substance in militar commanders and soldiers vain glory is an essential point for as iron sharpens iron so by glory one courage sharpeneth another in cases of great enterprise upon charge and adventure a composition of glorious natures doth put life into business and those that  ... 
to perpetuate a man s memory and virtue was never so beholding to human nature as it received his due at the second hand neither had the fame of cicero seneca plinius secundus borne her age so well if it had not been joined with some vanity in themselves like  ... 
discretion and in some persons is not only comely but gracious for excusations cessions modesty itself well governed are but arts of ostentation and amongst those arts there is none better than that which plinius secundus speaketh of which is to be liberal of praise and commendation to others in  ... 
if he be superior if he be not to be commended you much less glorious men are the scorn of wise men the admiration of fools the idols of parasites and the slaves of their own vaunts 
Of Honor and Reputation
the winning of honor is but the revealing of a man s virtue  ... 
perform that which hath not been attempted before or attempted and given over or hath been achieved but not with so good circumstance he shall purchase more honor than by effecting a matter of greater difficulty or virtue wherein he is but a follower if a man so temper his  ... 
honor him honor that is gained and broken upon another hath the quickest reflection like diamonds cut with facets and therefore let a man contend to excel any competitors of his in honor in outshooting them if he can in their own bow discreet followers and servants help much to  ... 
policy the true marshalling of the degrees of sovereign honor are these in the first place are conditores imperiorum founders of states and commonwealths such as were romulus cyrus caesar ottoman ismael in the second place are legislatores lawgivers which are also called second founders or perpetui principes because they  ... 
tyrants as augustus caesar vespasianus aurelianus theodoricus king henry the seventh of england king henry the fourth of france in the fourth place are propagatores or propugnatores imperii such as in honorable wars enlarge their territories or make noble defence against invaders and in the last place are patres patriae  ... 
them the next are duces belli great leaders in war such as are princes lieutenants and do them notable services in the wars the third are gratiosi favorites such as exceed not this scantling to be solace to the sovereign and harmless to the people and the fourth negotiis pares  ... 
the two decii 
Of Judicature
judges ought to remember that their office is jus dicere and not jus dare to interpret law and not to make law or give law else will it be like the authority claimed by the church of rome which under pretext of exposition of scripture doth not  ... 
saith the law is he that removeth the landmark the mislayer of a mere stone is to blame but it is the unjust judge that is the capital remover of landmarks when he defineth amiss of lands and property one foul sentence doth more hurt than many foul examples for  ... 
justice underneath them and to the sovereign or state above them first for the causes or parties that sue there be saith the scripture that turn judgment into wormwood and surely there be also that turn it into vinegar for injustice maketh it bitter and delays make it sour the  ... 
way to a just sentence as god useth to prepare his way by raising valleys and taking down hills so when there appeareth on either side an high hand violent prosecution cunning advantages taken combination power great counsel then is the virtue of a judge seen to make inequality equal  ... 
than the torture of laws specially in case of laws penal they ought to have care that that which was meant for terror be not turned into rigor and that they bring not upon the people that shower whereof the scripture speaketh pluet super eos laqueos for penal laws pressed  ... 
and death judges ought as far as the law permitteth in justice to remember mercy and to cast a severe eye upon the example but a merciful eye upon the person secondly for the advocates and counsel that plead patience and gravity of hearing is an essential part of justice  ... 
questions though pertinent the parts of a judge in hearing are four to direct the evidence to moderate length repetition or impertinency of speech to recapitulate select and collate the material points of that which hath been said and to give the rule or sentence whatsoever is above these is  ... 
god in whose seat they sit who represseth the presumptuous and giveth grace to the modest but it is more strange that judges should have noted favorites which cannot but cause multiplication of fees and suspicion of by ways there is due from the judge to the advocate some commendation  ... 
where there appeareth cunning counsel gross neglect slight information indiscreet pressing or an overbold defence and let not the counsel at the bar chop with the judge nor wind himself into the handling of the cause anew after the judge hath declared his sentence but on the other side let  ... 
precincts and purprise thereof ought to be preserved without scandal and corruption for certainly grapes as the scripture saith will not be gathered of thorns or thistles either can justice yield her fruit with sweetness amongst the briars and brambles of catching and polling clerks and ministers the attendance of  ... 
up beyond her bounds for their own scraps and advantage the third sort is of those that may be accounted the left hands of courts persons that are full of nimble and sinister tricks and shifts whereby they pervert the plain and direct courses of courts and bring justice into  ... 
ancient clerk skilful in precedents wary in proceeding and understanding in the business of the court is an excellent finger of a court and doth many times point the way to the judge himself fourthly for that which may concern the sovereign and estate judges ought above all to remember  ... 
judges and again when judges do often consult with the king and state the one when there is matter of law intervenient in business of state the other when there is some consideration of state intervenient in matter of law for many times the things deduced to judgment may be  ... 
just laws and true policy have any antipathy for they are like the spirits and sinews that one moves with the other let judges also remember that solomon s throne was supported by lions on both sides let them be lions but yet lions under the throne being circumspect that  ... 
saith of a greater law than theirs nos scimus quia lex bona est modo quis ea utatur legitime 
Of Anger
to seek to extinguish anger utterly is but a bravery of the stoics we have better oracles be angry but sin not let not the sun go down upon your anger anger  ... 
anger or appease anger in another for the first there is no other way but to meditate and ruminate well upon the effects of anger how it troubles man s life and the best time to do this is to look back upon anger when the fit is thoroughly over  ... 
kind of baseness as it appears well in the weakness of those subjects in whom it reigns children women old folks sick folks only men must beware that they carry their anger rather with scorn than with fear so that they may seem rather to be above the injury than  ... 
tender and delicate persons must needs be oft angry they have so many things to trouble them which more robust natures have little sense of the next is the apprehension and construction of the injury offered to be in the circumstances thereof full of contempt for contempt is that which  ... 
that a man should have as consalvo was wont to say telam honoris crassiorem but in all refrainings of anger it is the best remedy to win time and to make a man s self believe that the opportunity of his revenge is not yet come but that he foresees  ... 
proper for cummunia maledicta are nothing so much and again that in anger a man reveal no secrets for that makes him not fit for society the other that you do not peremptorily break off in any business in a fit of anger but howsoever you show bitterness do not  ... 
two remedies are by the contraries the former to take good times when first to relate to a man an angry business for the first impression is much and the other is to sever as much as may be the construction of the injury from the point of contempt imputing 
Of Vicissitude of Things
 ... 
of lethe runneth as well above ground as below there is an abstruse astrologer that saith if it were not for two things that are constant the one is that the fixed stars ever stand a like distance one from another and never come nearer together nor go further asunder  ... 
great droughts they do not merely dispeople and destroy phaeton s car went but a day and the three years drought in the time of elias was but particular and left people alive as for the great burnings by lightnings which are often in the west indies they are but  ... 
if none had been left if you consider well of the people of the west indies it is very probable that they are a newer or a younger people than the people of the old world and it is much more likely that the destruction that hath heretofore been there  ... 
the rivers of asia and africk and europe are but brooks to them their andes likewise or mountains are far higher than those with us whereby it seems that the remnants of generation of men were in such a particular deluge saved as for the observation that machiavel hath that  ... 
did revive the former antiquities the vicissitude of mutations in the superior globe are no fit matter for this present argument it may be plato s great year if the world should last so long would have some effect not in renewing the state of like individuals for that is  ... 
their journey than wisely observed in their effects specially in their respective effects that is what kind of comet for magnitude color version of the beams placing in the reign of heaven or lasting produceth what kind of effects there is a toy which i have heard and i would  ... 
warm winters summers with little heat and the like and they call it the prime it is a thing i do the rather mention because computing backwards i have found some concurrence but to leave these points of nature and to come to men the greatest vicissitude of things amongst  ... 
as far as the weakness of human judgment can give stay to so great revolutions when the religion formerly received is rent by discords and when the holiness of the professors of religion is decayed and full of scandal and withal the times be stupid ignorant and barbarous you may  ... 
one is the supplanting or the opposing of authority established for nothing is more popular than that the other is the giving license to pleasures and a voluptuous life for as for speculative heresies such as were in ancient times the arians and now the armenians though they work mightily  ... 
the sword for martyrdoms i reckon them amongst miracles because they seem to exceed the strength of human nature and i may do the like of superlative and admirable holiness of life surely there is no better way to stop the rising of new sects and schisms than to reform  ... 
seats or stages of the war in the weapons and in the manner of the conduct wars in ancient time seemed more to move from east to west for the persians assyrians arabians tartars which were the invaders were all eastern people it is true the gauls were western but  ... 
it hath seldom or never been seen that the far southern people have invaded the northern but contrariwise whereby it is manifest that the northern tract of the world is in nature the more martial region be it in respect of the stars of that hemisphere or of the great  ... 
breaking and shivering of a great state and empire you may be sure to have wars for great empires while they stand do enervate and destroy the forces of the natives which they have subdued resting upon their own protecting forces and then when they fail also all goes to  ... 
kingdoms do likewise stir up wars for when a state grows to an over power it is like a great flood that will be sure to overflow as it hath been seen in the states of rome turkey spain and others look when the world hath fewest barbarous peoples but  ... 
and sustentation it is of necessity that once in an age or two they discharge a portion of their people upon other nations which the ancient northern people were wont to do by lot casting lots what part should stay at home and what should seek their fortunes when a  ... 
yet we see even they have returns and vicissitudes for certain it is that ordnance was known in the city of the oxidrakes in india and was that which the macedonians called thunder and lightning and magic and it is well known that the use of ordnance hath been in  ... 
the commodious use of them as that they may serve in all weathers that the carriage may be light and manageable and the like for the conduct of the war at the first men rested extremely upon number they did put the wars likewise upon main force and valor pointing  ... 
skilful in the ordering of their battles in the youth of a state arms do flourish in the middle age of a state learning and then both of them together for a time in the declining age of a state mechanical arts and merchandize learning hath his infancy when it  ... 
of vicissitude lest we become giddy as for the philology of them that is but a circle of tales and therefore not fit for this writing 
Of Fame
the poets make fame a monster they describe her in part finely and elegantly and in part gravely and sententiously they say look how  ... 
clouds that in the daytime she sitteth in a watch tower and flieth most by night that she mingleth things done with things not done and that she is a terror to great cities but that which passeth all the rest is they do recount that the earth mother of  ... 
monster and bring her to feed at the hand and govern her and with her fly other ravening fowl and kill them it is somewhat worth but we are infected with the style of the poets to speak now in a sad and serious manner there is not in all  ... 
spread and multiplied and how they may be checked and laid dead and other things concerning the nature of fame fame is of that force as there is scarcely any great action wherein it hath not a great part especially in the war mucianus undid vitellius by a fame that  ... 
caesar s own soldiers loved him not and being wearied with the wars and laden with the spoils of gaul would forsake him as soon as he came into italy livia settled all things for the succession of her son tiberius by continual giving out that her husband augustus was  ... 
of grecia by giving out that the grecians had a purpose to break his bridge of ships which he had made athwart hellespont there be a thousand such like examples and the more they are the less they need to be repeated because a man meeteth with them everywhere therefore 
